Tanya

Chapter 1


The weak sun filtering through the wooden shutters played across the sleeping girl‟s

face, and she shivered, pulling the thin cover up around her ears. Tanya was reluctant to

wake; it was bitterly cold, and the prospect of another day of hard work and meagre rations

was uninviting. She heard her sister get out of bed, and she peeped between her lashes,

hoping she would leave her alone a little longer. She studied Gerda covertly as the girl

struggled into her shift and petticoats. At seventeen, she was already blossoming into a

lovely young woman, riva lling the beauty her mother had once possessed. Humming

under her breath, Gerda plaited her long flaxen hair, and once again, Tanya wished she

possessed her sister‟s looks. She made the mistake of opening her eyes, and Gerda

immediately frowned at her.

„Come, sleepy head, ‟tis long past dawn, and there is work to be done.‟

Tanya groaned and reluctantly sat up, teeth chattering, then catching her sister‟s

admonitory eye, leapt naked from bed and threw on her clothes, her breath clouding in the

freezing air. She moved lightly to the window, chipping at the ice that had formed on the

inside of the thick glass, and pressed her nose against it to stare out wistfully.

The bleak, snow-covered landscape was hardly prepossessing, but Tanya was used

to the barrenness of the Swedish countryside and barely gave it a glance. She was

straining her eyes towards the far horizon where lay the village of Pattina, her whole being

reaching out towards the life and excitement contained within those narrow twisting streets

and dark alleyways. She had only visited it a few times in her short life, and it represented

the sum total of her ambition – to actually live within its bustling streets, to be able to lean

out of one of the gabled windows , and watch the people pass beneath.

„Tanya! Will you stop daydreaming!‟

Tanya



6



Her sister‟s sharp voice recalled her to her surroundings, and she dragged her feet

across the room to pull a comb through her tangled copper curls. She studied her

reflection apathetically in the spotted mirror, finding nothing to admire in t he small pointed

face and huge green eyes looking back at her. At thirteen, Tanya was still underdeveloped

and thin, with the long-legged awkwardness of a young, untried colt. She leaned nearer

the mirror, noting that the powdering of freckles that covered her straight little nose still had

not disappeared despite the various remedies she had wheedled from their old nurse. She

stuck her tongue out at herself and threw the comb down, rebellion rising within her. The

longing to escape from the drudgery of life on the tiny farm, to spread her wings and find

out what living was really all about sometimes became almost too much to bear.

Pulling on her boots, she clambered down the ladder into the room below. The plump

figure of Maria bustled past, laying out the wooden platters on the table for their morning

meal, and Tanya smiled perfunctorily at the old woman before crossing to kiss her mother

dutifully on the cheek. She coughed as the huge stove set in the corner of the room

belched out smoke and aimed a vicious kick at its scarred sides. The stove and the big

scrubbed table took up most of their living space, and together with the two tiny bedrooms

nestling in the roof comprised the whole of the small wooden house.

„Good morning, girls. Go and wash, then we‟ll break fast.‟

Matilda de la Verrière pushed back a strand of hair from her forehead and watched

her daughters trail out of the door to the pump. She loved both her children, but every time

she saw Tanya, something tugged at her heart; the girl was so like her father in both looks

and temperament.

Matilda had been born in Reval, the only daughter of a wealthy Swedish merchant,

and had received an excellent education which included those scholarly subjects more

usually reserved for the male sex. At sixteen, she had fallen head over heels in love with

Tanya



7



Jean de la Verrière, the penniless younger son of a noble French family. Jean had been

travelling to escape the more pressing of his creditors, but it was too late when Matilda

finally discovered his true vocation – the fatal tendency to gamble away whatever money

fell into his hands.

Olsen Svenson had not approved of his daughter‟s choice, but since the young man

so obviously returned her feelings, and as he had always been unable to deny his

daughter anything, Matilda had her way. He died two years later a broken man, just after

Matilda had presented him with a granddaughter. His heart had been weakening even

before he had watched his son-in-law slowly but inevitably gamble away his daughter‟s

inheritance.

After his death, things deteriorated badly. Although Olsen‟s influence had not been

great, it had nevertheless been some restraint; once Jean realised that what was left of the

small fortune amassed by the old man over a lifetime now belonged to him, it went to hi s

head. The fact that it took him almost two years to lose it was the only surprising factor.

The large, comfortable house in Reval was now the only asset left, but before he had a

chance to mortgage it, a trifling affair of honour leading to a duel, rather mercifully,

prevented him. He was killed, and Matilda was left almost penniless with a daughter to

bring up and another child on the way. She sold her father‟s house to pay off the most

pressing of her husband‟s debts and shook the dust of Reval from her feet. Taking her

small daughter and her servant Maria, she went to live with her father‟s brother who owned

a small farm near Pattina, close to the Russian border, and there , Tanya had been born.

Matilda had paid for her keep by cooking and cleaning for her uncle, who had never

married, and on his death, the holding reverted to her, together with a small stipend.

Matilda was a strong woman who worked hard, and they managed to hold at bay the

grinding poverty suffered by so many of their neighbours, but it was always a struggle, and

Tanya



8



some days, she could not help but think that somehow she had failed her daughters.

Gerda never worried her, she was placid and happy with her lot, but as Tanya grew , she

could see more and more of her errant husband in her, and sometimes she feared for her.

This wilful, tempestuous creature would never be happy with life on a farm such as this.

She belonged to a different world, the one her husband had once enjoyed in France. To

ensure that they at least had some advantage, Matilda had taught her daughters the

subjects she had been lucky enough to learn in her youth, having brought with her such

books as she had been able to save. Gerda never got much further than writing her name

and adding a few sums, but Tanya learned avidly. Anything and everything was absorbed

into that bright head bent diligently over her books. Matilda, who was fluent in French

taught Tanya that language, and it was the only time her youngest daughter seemed really

happy, wrestling with languages or mathematics, soon leaving her mother far behind.

Tanya herself somehow knew that learning would help her to shake off the shackles

of poverty. In some dim, half-understood way, she knew only that one day she was going

to make something of herself, be somebody. She had become sure of this after one of her

forays into Pattina for more reading material. She had been picking her way through the

garbage littering the streets, her little nose wrinkling in disgust, when she had heard the

loud cries of „Make way, scum, make way,‟ and a large carriage drawn by four plunging

horses came careering towards her, the driver laying about him with his whip. As she

flattened herself against the wall, Tanya had caught a glimpse of the occupants of the

coach, seen in an instant, but etched upon her mind forever.

The sumptuous gown and haughty profile of the lady had taken Tanya‟s breath away.

The bonnet, with its nodding plumes shadowed a face of extraordinary beauty, and no less

beautiful was the man seated opposite, hair powdered and curled, a pomander held to his

Tanya



9



thin nostrils to drive away the stink of rotting cabbage and unwashed humanity prevalent in

the poorer parts of the town.

To the thin, poorly dressed child , cowering back to avoid the flailing hooves of the

magnificent black horses, they might have belonged to another world. The flashing

necklace glimpsed around the lady‟s throat would probably have kept Tanya‟s family and

most of the surrounding district in food and clothing for the rest of their lives. The half-

understood feeling of rebellion, of dissatisfaction with her lot, filled her mind long after the

coach had disappeared. A longing to be part of that world permeated her being, a longing

so strong she felt almost sick with it. Somehow she knew she belonged there, not married

to some stolid, doltish clod like Karl, to whom her sister was promised. How Gerda could

bear that round peasant face and slow stupid grin was beyond her, but as far as she could

tell, her sister was quite satisfied with the future laid out for her.

„Well, I‟m not!‟ muttered Tanya through clenched teeth. „One day, I‟m going to

escape.‟

She daydreamed about life in that other world all through morning prayers, as she

did most mornings, but snapped out of her reverie in time for breakfast. Tanya was always

hungry, and today was no exception. She dipped the black bread in her gruel, mopping up

every morsel, but as usual, her stomach still felt empty. It always did.

Gerda was ordered into the corner with a pile of mending, and Tanya waited gloomily

for her own allotment of tasks. How would it feel, she wondered, to have nothing to do, and

to please oneself entirely?

Matilda eyed her youngest daughter‟s rebellious face and sighed inwardly.

„Tanya, go and milk the goat, then take some milk over to the Dakovs to trade for

some dried meat. They have a new baby, yet again, and poor Helga hasn‟t enough milk to

feed a sparrow. Ah, but times are hard.‟

Tanya



10



Nothing loath to spend the morning out of doors, Tanya pulled on her old fur coat,

milked the goat with more energy than usual, then set off to walk the five miles to the

Dakov‟s cabin, taking a short cut through the woods.

The air was bitterly cold as she drew it into her lungs, making her cough. The winter

had been long and hard and seemed reluctant to give way to spring. The ground was iron

hard beneath her boots as she strode out in a vain attempt to keep warm, impervious to

the beauty of the tall pines far overhead, their dark branches intermittently speared by

sunlight. The silence was all pervading, the only sound the crunching of pine cones under

her feet and the occasional cry of a bird. Once, far in the distance, she thought she heard

a cry, and she stopped in her tracks, ears straining, but the silence returned.

„Imagination,‟ she muttered under her breath and promptly forgot all about it.

Humming softly, she picked her way through the last of the trees and made her way

towards the Dakov‟s cabin. As she neared the rough wooden building, her steps faltered,

then she stopped, puzzled. All was still and quiet, with no bevy of children tumbling out to

meet her. Nothing stirred; even the birds had stopped singing. Feeling unreasonably

apprehensive, she almost crept up to the door and knocked. It swung drunkenly on its

hinges, and she pushed it open gingerly and stepped inside. The room was empty, but the

table was laid for a meal, the bread and precious salt still in the centre. She put down the

jug of milk and frowned. The room was still warm despite the open door, and as she

walked around the stove, her heart jumped wildly. The huge cooking pot was turned over

on its side, its contents still dripping slowly out and congealing in a puddle on the floor.

Swinging round, her stomach churning, she noticed the absence of Dakov‟s huge wooden

axe from its usual place above the door.

With a dry mouth and panic sending icy fingers up and down her spine, she tried to

scold herself into action, and somehow managed to get her feet moving.

Tanya



11



She peered out around the door, hesitating for a moment, poised for flight, but

nothing moved.

She considered shouting, but something held her back. Instead , she moved around

the back of the cabin and set off up the slope towards the forest, some vague idea of

perhaps climbing a tree to see if she could spot anyone in her mind. She promised herself

she would just have a quick look, then set off home to tell her mother what she had found.

She tried to convince herself that perhaps the Dakovs had gone visiting or journeyed into

town, but she knew this was most unlikely.

Leaving the clearing, she walked a few paces into the dim light beneath the trees,

then stopped, nerves jumping as a splash of colour against the snow caught her eye. She

couldn‟t quite make out what it was, but as she drew nearer, she saw it was a small carved

wooden doll, tied around with a piece of red rag. She recognised it instantly as belonging

to little Nikki, the Dakov‟s youngest daughter. The child never let it out of her sight, and

almost unthinkingly, Tanya bent down to pick it up. As she did so, a small scream escaped

her. Protruding from beneath a bush was a tiny white foot. As though in a dream, Tanya

pulled the branches aside and knelt down by the pathetic little bundle huddled on the

ground. It was Nikki, and the child was quite dead. Even Tanya, who had never met death

face to face before, could see that. From the angle of her head, it looked as though her

neck was broken.

„Poor baby,‟ whispered Tanya, cradling the cold little body in her arms. „To die so

young.‟ She crossed herself and sent up a prayer for the child‟s soul, then feeling strangely

detached, she pushed aside the rest of the thicket and stepped through.

Sheer horror held her rigid for a moment; she recoiled and almost ran, then slowly,

reluctantly turned back, unable to drag her eyes away. Scattered around the small clearing

Tanya



12



were nine bodies. Dakov and his three sons had fought bravely and well and were horribly

mutilated. Dakov himself has been decapitated, his blood congealing in the snow.

Beside them lay his wife and daughter, a strapping girl of Tanya‟s own age. Their

pitiful, naked bodies lay broken and bruised, blood staining the snow between the young

girl‟s thighs. With a low moan, Tanya turned away, then froze once more, her eyes riveted

on the other three bodies. They lay in all their fierce splendour, arrogant even in death. Her

horrified gaze took in every detail, from the scarlet damask trousers and blouse each wore,

to the brutal swarthiness of their rigid faces. Although Tanya had never seen a Cossack,

she had heard too many stories of these fierce, merciless men not to recognise them for

what they were. Although officially Sweden was not at war with Russia, raids of this type

across the border by bands of Cossack brigands were becoming more and more common.

She remained transfixed for a moment, q uite unable to move, a queer dead look in

her eyes, then she turned away suddenly, stomach heaving, and was violently sick.

When the spasm passed, she leaned against a tree, gasping. All her strength had left

her, and she was trembling violently. For the first time, she noticed how the snow had

been trampled by many feet and glanced around in sudden fear, crouching like a wild

animal at bay. It was then that she saw the tiny body at her feet. It was Helga Dakov‟s

newborn baby, and someone had dashed its brains out against the tree.

She gave one high, shrill scream that echoed around the clearing like the death cry

of a tortured animal, then she turned and fled, sobbing violently. Her one thought was to

get home, back to her own familiar world where she could cradle her head in her mother‟s

lap and find some sanity again. She ran blindly, chest bursting, slipping and stumbling in

the snow, impervious to the twigs and branches grabbing at her as though to stop her

flight. She was almost through the forest when her foot caught in a root and her ankle

twisted, sending her crashing to the ground. She lay for a moment, face pressed against

Tanya



13



the ground fighting for breath, then struggled up to her hands and knees. Some inner

strength forced her to her feet, and she set off again, limping now, the pain somehow

bringing her back to reality. Never had the way seemed so long. Her heart was

hammering, and she was almost at the end of her strength when she reached the edge of

the trees. There was a mist before her eyes, and she shook her head to clear it. Strange.

She was sure she could hear laughter. Why, of all things, should she hear laughter now?

The mist cleared, and she stared down at the farm below her. Her brain took a while to

register what her eyes had already focused on. The laughter was not inside her head. It

was a coarse, male laughter, and it was issuing from the throats of some twenty or so

fierce, gaily clad men gathered in her mother‟s yard. The cause of the laughter was a

woman, tied by her ankles to one of the Cossack‟s horses. Its rider was galloping round

and round in front of the cabin, the body bumping and twisting after it like a limp rag doll.

The long blonde hair was matted with blood, the victim‟s screams echoing like the cries of

a lost soul. Some distance away, another group of men held down a struggling form

spread-eagled on the ground. They were queuing up, one behind the other, fumbling with

the strings of their trousers. Tanya could hear her sister‟s despairing cries quite clearly,

even above the weakening screams of her mother.

Smoke and flames were licking the sides of the cabin, and even as she watched , a

figure burst out of the door, hair and clothes blazing, screaming, screaming . . .

Something snapped in Tanya‟s brain; it was too much for her to bear. She fell to the

ground, froth coming from her mouth. Her body went rigid, her limbs twitching convulsively,

and flecks of blood appeared at the corners of her mouth. A merciful wall of

unconsciousness bore her away down a long, dark tunnel. She was vaguely aware of a

dim figure bending over her and of being lifted up, then the darkness rushed back leaving

Tanya



14



only a tiny pinpoint of light far off in the distance. Although Tanya did not know it, that light

was her sole link with life and sanity, and it was going to be a long, hard fight back to both!

Tanya



15





Chapter 2


Tanya walked down a long grey corridor. The grey was not uniform, but rather

swirled around her in a moving, shifting pattern. Shadowy figures called out to her,

stretching out supplicating arms, there one moment, insubstantial the next.

„Come, Tanya,‟ they cried in voices like the wind. „Come.‟

„It‟s Gerda, Tanya. Come with me.‟

Tanya tried to find her way out of the corridor, tried to find her way to her sister and

mother waiting for her, just out of reach, but something seemed to hold her back. It was as

though her feet took her forward towards the point of light at the end of the darkness,

whether she willed it or not. Sometimes she struggled, sometimes she just let herself be

carried forward, but the light remained steadfast in front of her. Suddenly, she was tired of

the endless grey, and a passion arose in her to see again bright colours, to smell the scent

of flowers, to feel the sun on her face. As the passion grew, so did the light, until it began

to disperse the grey shadows fleeing before its onslaught. The light became brighter and

brighter, until she had to shut her eyes to protect them from the glare. When she opened

them again, she stared around her in astonishment, for she found herself in even stranger

surroundings.

She was lying on a stone ledge cut into a rocky wall, covered with a pile of furs. She

was in some kind of cave, large and airy with a covering of moss on the floor and odd

pieces of furniture scattered around. Towards the opening, a fire burned, and over it hung

a large pot from which a most delicious smell wafted. Tanya‟s nostrils quivered, and she

tried to sit up. Panic gripped her. She was straining every muscle, but she could not move!

She couldn‟t even lift her head.

„Where am I?‟ she tried to say, but only managed a dry croak.

Tanya



16

„Ah, my child, you are conscious at last. May Saint Peter be praised. I had my doubts

that you would ever return to the land of the living.‟

Tanya gathered all her strength and managed to tur n her head towards the

quavering voice, and her eyes dilated with fear.

A tall, painfully thin man loomed over her, his head on one side like a bird. He wore

peasant clothes, but gathered around his shoulders hung a huge cloak, liberally

embellished with the feathers of many varieties of birds, enhancing his birdlike

appearance. Her eyes travelled up to his face, and some of her fear left her. The

expression on the lined old face was one of great sweetness, the eyes that twinkled down

at her of that shade of blue most commonly seen in sailors who have spent a lifetime

searching far horizons. They seemed to see right inside her, searching out her soul. His

hair was pure white and straggled down to his shoulders.

Becoming aware that she was staring open-mouthed at the man, she flushed, and

once again tried to sit up.

„No, no, my child, you must rest. That is what you need now more than anything.

Rest, and plenty of good food – and iron. Yes, yes, iron is what you need to make your

blood thick and rich again.‟

Nodding his head, he hopped over to the pot, gave it a stir, and then ladled some of

the contents into a bowl.

„First, you must eat. By the Holy Martyr, you are all skin, bone, and eyes.‟

He put an arm beneath her shoulders and raised her up, spooning the b roth into her

mouth.

„Come on now, eat it up, every drop. It will make you strong again.‟

Tanya swallowed the broth ravenously and then obediently drank the contents of the

goblet he held to her lips. It smelled strange, and she wrinkled her nose.

Tanya



17

„Ah, ‟tis not the sweetest mixture, but it will make you better very quickly. Iron and

herbs, iron and herbs.‟

Tanya sank back down with a sigh, and almost immediately slept again, but this time,

it was a deep, normal sleep undisturbed by dreams.

When she awoke, she felt immeasurably stronger and even managed to struggle up

a little, to take further stock of her surroundings.

It was dark now, but inside the cave, a smoking torch thrust into a bracket in the rock

gave a fitful light. In the far corner, the old man hovered over a jumble of phials and

bottles, some bubbling and giving off a pungent odour. Tanya stared in amazement and

crossed herself nervously.

„Who are you?‟ she demanded and was surprised at how strong her voice sounded

now. „Are you . . . are you a witch, or a warlock?‟

A superstitious shiver ran up her back as she asked the question, and the old man

chuckled.

„No, child, I‟m neither. Just an old hermit who likes to live alone out here in the

woods, picking my herbs and making medicines to help the sick. Now spring is here, they

grow fast, and I can start my work again.‟

„Spring!‟ exclaimed Tanya. „I don‟t understand. How long have I been here? What

happened to . . . ?‟

„Peace, child,‟ cried the old man sharply. „All your questions will be answered when

the time is right. You have been very ill, little one, and have been as one dead for over a

month. I have only managed to keep you alive by forcing my medicines through your lips,

and thank God at least you swallowed them. It brings joy to my old heart to see the colour

back in your cheeks again and to hear you speak.‟

„But how did I get here? My mother and sister will be frantic with worry, they will . . .‟

She broke off and fell back against the pillows, holding her hands out as though to ward off

Tanya



18

the memories that flooded back, that danced in her brain like so many goblins, all those

red-coated Cossacks.

„Oh Holy Mother, I don‟t want to remember,‟ she cried brokenly. „Can you not let me

forget?‟

„Do not torture yourself, child.‟ The gnarled old hands imprisoned her restless ones,

and compassion shone from his eyes. „The memories will fade. I know you find that hard to

believe now, but fade they will.‟

„Are . . . are they all dead?‟ Her voice was low and quivered with pain. „Please tell me

– I must know the truth.‟

„I buried three bodies, little one,‟ he replied. „A young maiden with long fair hair,

another two female but unrecognisable, I‟m afraid. It is all I can tell you. Yes, weep, weep,

tears are the best remedy of all. I will take you to their graves once you are stronger, and

you may say your farewells.‟

And Tanya wept – a long and anguished weeping that left her exhausted, with no

more tears to shed. She wept for her childhood, gone for ever with those she loved, and

for the useless cruelty of man to man. Finally, dry eyed and drained, she sat up and stared

at the old man wildly.

„Curse them!‟ she screamed in a high, unnatural voice. „Curse them all. What right

have they to take lives that way? I‟ ll have my revenge, I swear it, I‟ ll kill every Russian I

can get my hands on – and Tsar Peter, too, I‟ll even kill him, do you hear me?‟

Her voice died away, and she fell back, panting. The old man‟s face was sad.

Tanya



19

„An eye for an eye,‟ he quoted. „Once I too believed in that, but I have

found out to my cost that it solves nothing. Every man is some mother‟s son,

or father, or lover. I had a wife and son once. We were serfs to a noble lord

in Russia. One day, on a whim, he had them both whipped to death in front

of my eyes. Said they hadn‟t bowed low enough when he passed by. My son

was only six.‟

„Oh, I‟m so sorry.‟ Tanya stared at him, horrified. „Whatever did you

do?‟

„I felt then just as you do now. I bided my time, and when the

opportunity arose, I killed him, and then I ran away. Only as I was hiding in,

one of his barns, his young son rode past, and I realised I had deprived him

of his father. I was stricken with remorse and vowed then never to kill again. I

have kept that vow. Finally, I came to this place, and I have stayed here ever

since, making friends with the birds and animals, and helping those who

come to me for help. I have even gained some small reputation for my herbal

remedies.‟

A memory tugged at Tanya‟s mind of Dakov‟s wife telling her mother of

a hermit who lived in the woods who had cured her youngest of a fever. Even

as she remembered, the thought of that child‟s lifeless body momentarily

blotted out all other memories, and she shivered.

„Well, I don‟t blame you for killing that man,‟ she said simply. „He

couldn‟t have been much of a father, a wicked man like that.‟

„Perhaps, child, but it was not my place to deprive him of his right to

live. One day, you will think as I do, when your blood no longer runs hot. Until

that time, what, I wonder, are we to do with you?‟

Tanya



20

„May I not stay with you for a while?‟ Tanya gazed at him appealingly. „I

have nowhere else to go, no relatives or friends – apart from you. And I

haven‟t even thanked you for saving my life, or even asked your name. I do

thank you, with all my heart. I am Tanya de la Verrière, and I hope one day

to be able to repay you for your kindness.‟

The old man‟s face softened as he looked down at her flushed face.

„Welcome, Tanya de la Verrière. You may stay for as long as the fancy takes

you. I am called Sten‟ka, the only name I have ever had. You will be

company for an old recluse, but I fear you will soon become lonely.‟

„As far as I‟m concerned, I don‟t care if I never see another human

being again,‟ declared Tanya violently. „Not after my experiences with them

of late.‟

Sten‟ka smiled sadly. „How old are you, child?‟

„Thirteen – almost fourteen,‟ replied Tanya defensively. He shook his

head. „So young, so very young. Ah well, you will change, little Tanya, as you

grow older.‟

„Never!‟ declared Tanya decisively.

The following months were a healing balm to Tanya‟s shattered life. After

she had visited the rough graves of her lost family, she felt some sort of

peace, although the pain in her heart she knew would never really leave her.

She and Sten‟ka grew very close, he becoming the father she had never

known, and she the child he had lost.

Her days were spent wandering the forest, gathering the various herbs

Sten‟ka showed her, learning how each one cured a different ailment. She

was introduced to some of his animal friends, watching in amazement as he

Tanya



21

fondled the big, shaggy bears that lumbered through the trees; even the

birds came to him quite fearlessly, perching on his head and singing. The

only animals she avoided were the wolves, for Sten‟ka had told her they

could never be trusted, and some inner fear prevented her from approaching

them.

She became almost like a wild young animal herself, flitting silently from

tree to tree, moving with a lithe grace. Gradually, the horrors of the past

began to fade, although some deep scars would remain with her for ever.

She spent the long summer evenings teaching Sten‟ka how to write his

name in the dirt and reading to him from one of the mildewed books he had

contrived to find for her. Mostly, they would sit and talk. He told her of his

childhood in Russia and of Moscow, where he had been born. He had grown

up there, until sold to the noble lord who had later been the cause of such

sorrow in his life.

He described in vivid detail the domes and spires of the churches of

that fabulous city, of the twisting lanes around the square gardens, and Red

Square itself with its market stalls and street vendors. He told her of the

fantastic painted palaces of the Boyar noblemen and of the desperate

poverty suffered by the majority of its inhabitants. Tanya would sit curled up,

listening with wide eyes to his tales of the savage splendour of Russia and its

peoples. She in turn would tell Sten‟ka of her childhood and of her mother‟s

life before her marriage.

„So you have noble blood, Tanya,‟ Sten‟ka had said when he first heard

of her father. „I was sure you must have by the way you hold up your head

Tanya



22

and look the world in the eye. Never let them take that away from you, little

one.‟

When the nights drew in and the cold wind swept down from the north,

they collected firewood and stored up dried fruit and nuts, competing for

them with the squirrels. Tanya baked black bread from the little rye they

managed to grow, and somehow they managed to survive the long, hard

winter.

When the days were warm, Sten‟ka showed her how to collect the wild

honey without disturbing the bees, and she would bathe every day in the cool

water of the nearby spring.

It was in its clear depths that Tanya saw herself grow from a child to a

woman. She would bend over the water and brush her hair, marvelling at the

changes wrought by nature in her young body, impervious to the fact that all

the promise she had never been able to see in herself had been fulfilled.

Hers was that rare kind of beauty that does not dim with age, ethereal and

elusive. Her skin was like the wild roses that grew amongst the trees, her

emerald eyes, huge and somehow luminous against its delicate hue. Her

long, copper-coloured hair curled naturally down her back in wild abundance,

and her budding womanhood showed itself in the high little breasts, tiny

waist, and long, shapely legs. Her noble lineage could be seen in her classic

features and perfect bone structure.

Sten‟ka, now grown even more bent and frail, would sit and study her

sometimes, with a worried frown between his eyes.

„You are too beautiful, Tanya, no good will come of it,‟ he would mutter

beneath his breath. „No man will ever look at you and not want you.‟

Tanya



23

When Tanya asked him what he meant, her wide, candid gaze fixed on

his face, he would shake his head and subside.

Tanya was worried about Sten‟ka. Every day, the old man seemed to

shrink a little, losing his breath more easily and never venturing far afield

from the cave. She took more and more of the heavy work upon herself,

scolding him when he demurred.

He looked at her with his head on one side, the kind old eyes dimmed

and sad.

„Winter draws in, little one, and my time is near, I can feel it in my

bones. What will become of you when I am gone? I should have made some

provision for you, not been so selfish as to keep you here with me. I should

have found a home for you in the town, with a woman to show you how to go

on in the world. You are so young, so vulnerable. How will you manage?

Where will you go?‟

Tanya leapt to her feet, shaking her head. „I won‟t have you talking like

that. You aren‟t going to die, Sten‟ka, I won‟t have it.‟

He smiled sadly at her imperious tone. „When you are young, you think

you can bend the world to your every whim, but you will learn, child. All of us

die, and I know my time is drawing near.‟

Tanya sat rigid until she could hear Sten‟ka‟s breathing gradually

become regular and deep, and she knew he was asleep. Although she

refused to accept his words, somewhere deep down inside her, she knew he

was right, and she felt frightened, and very alone. Outside, the moon had

risen, and she suddenly felt a need to be outside, to run and run through the

woods until she dropped. Impulsively she jumped up, and with one backward

Tanya



24

glance at the frail form huddled beneath the worn blanket, she stepped

outside, sniffing the air like some strange wild animal. For a moment, she

stood, poised for flight, then she began to run. Twisting and turning between

the trees, she ran on and on until her breath was sobbing and she could go

no further. She collapsed on to a tree stump, panting. When her heart

stopped thumping, she looked around her. She had come further than she

thought; the trees here were thinning out, and the place was unfamiliar to

her. It was a strange feeling, sitting there in the deathly hush of the forest,

with the moon sailing overhead in the vast black dome of the sky. She threw

her head back and closed her eyes, bathing in the silver brilliance as though

worshipping some strange god.

The peace that was gradually replacing her earlier anxiety was rudely

shattered by a twig cracking loudly quite close to her. She opened her eyes,

then froze, terrified. A man was standing quite still, only a few paces away,

staring at her with an expression she hardly understood but which sent a

prickle of fear down her back. He was a rustic, simple-looking fellow with a

vacuous look about him and a slack, wet mouth, but it was the look in his eye

that held Tanya rigid. For a few moments, neither of them moved and then

he suddenly held out his hand.

„Come, little fairy, little sprite,‟ he chanted. „Fedor won‟t hurt you. You

shall come home with Fedor and bring him luck, eh?‟

His voice broke the spell. With a frightened cry, Tanya leapt to her feet

and fled. She could hear him thundering along behind her, but soon, she was

back in familiar surroundings, and nobody but Sten‟ka knew these woods

better. She twisted and turned between the trees, and soon the sound of

Tanya



25

pursuit died away. She slowed to a trot, glanced over her shoulder, then

hurried on towards the safety of the cave. Sobbing for breath, she sank on to

her bed and buried her face in her hands. The encounter had frightened her

considerably, first because it had been so long since she had seen anyone

other than Sten‟ka, but mostly because of the look on the man‟s face. She

might be quite innocent, but even Tanya had been able to recognise the

naked lust staring out from his eyes. She shuddered at the memory and

turned her troubled eyes towards Sten‟ka. If what he had said was true, how

would she survive? Apart from the grief she hardly dared think about, she

acknowledged that she had grown almost totally dependant upon him, and

the thought of suddenly having to fend for herself was terrifying.

She must have drifted into sleep, for the next thing she knew she had

awoken with a jump, staring up into the darkness, heart pounding. What had

awakened her? Had she heard a noise?

She strained her ears, but only silence filled them.

„Nerves,‟ she muttered beneath her breath, preparing to lie down again.

„Just nerves.‟

„Tanya.‟ It was only a whisper on the edge of her consciousness, but it

brought her upright again. „Tanya.‟

For a moment she froze ; her heart beating so loudly she felt sick, then

with an overwhelming sense of relief, she realised it was Sten‟ka‟s voice

calling her. She fumbled with a candle, lit it, and crossed the room to the old

man‟s side.

Tanya



26

„What is it, old friend?‟ she asked tenderly, smoothing back the hair

from his forehead. His skin felt clammy and cold, and her heart sank. „Do you

wish for something?‟

His hand came up and grasped hers convulsively.

„Tanya, I knew you would come, I knew you would not fail me.‟

„What is it you want, Sten‟ka, what can I do for you?‟

„Just to have you near me, child, to hold your hand. Your touch drives

away the darkness for a while. I can‟t see you, but I can feel your presence. I

don‟t want to die alone in the dark, without a priest to grant me absolution,

and I have many sins, so many sins upon my head.

Tanya gripped his hand harder, a lump in her throat.

„God knows you are not a bad man, Sten‟ka,‟ she whispered huskily.

„Trust in him, he knows what you really are, a good and kind man.‟

The flickering candlelight showed the expression of peace that

descended on his face. „Thank you, my child. I have had a long life, and your

coming into it brought sunshine into my last years. How I would have hated

to die alone, and it is so dark. If only I could see your face one last time.‟

Weeping now, Tanya bent over him, her hair falling around her. She

held the candle closer to her face, and his eyes met hers for an instant, a

light shining from them.

A sudden chorus of birdsong made her lift her head, and through the

mist of tears, she saw a pale light creep into the cave. „Look, Sten‟ka, the

dawn is coming,‟ she cried, hope flaring within her. „You will get better now, I

will tend you, and . . .‟

Tanya



27

She broke off, staring down at him. His eyes had closed, and he was

no longer breathing. He looked very peaceful, and the half smile on his lips

gave him a look of contentment.

Tanya‟s mind went blank, and she was still crouched beside him,

holding his hand tightly when the sun had risen quite high. The cramp in her

legs slowly brought her back to reality, and she looked around her with the

dazed eyes of a sleepwalker. Passing her hand across her eyes with a

pathetic little gesture, she rose painfully to her feet.

Still moving automatically, her mind numb, Tanya crossed Sten‟ka‟s

hands on his breast and wrapped him up in his blanket and colourful cloak,

then in the entrance to the cave , she painfully dug a grave, scooping out the

soil with a piece of wood with her bare hands. His body felt strangely light as

she laid it to rest, and the tears still did not come as she slowly covered it

with earth and leaves, then a few slabs of rock to keep the wild animals at

bay. She placed a crude wooden cross fashioned from two sticks of wood on

the grave and sat back on her heels.

„Sleep, Sten‟ka,‟ she whispered softly. „Sleep, old friend, this is where

you belong. I know God will forgive you your sins.‟

Sitting back on her heels she looked around, wondering vaguely what

she should do now. She felt empty, lost, and very lonely.

For the next couple of days, she brooded around the cave, never

moving far from the graveside, trying to instil some purpose into her life, to

decide what she should do, but she could not bring herself to leave,

somehow. By the evening of the second day, she was feeling light-headed

through lack of food and sleep and, when she first heard the voices, thought

Tanya



28

they were part of the strange world into which she felt herself drifting, but

gradually, they impinged on her consciousness until she realised that the

rough masculine tones were no part of her dream world.

Fear made her move swiftly and silently in the direction of the voices. It

was sheer good fortune that she saw them before they saw her. Drawing

back behind a tree, she listened furtively, and then risked a quick look. Her

heart thumped and a trembling ran along her body. It was the man who had

come across her in the clearing the other night. He was speaking to his two

companions in rough, passionate tones.

„I tell you it‟s true, I did see the fairy, back there on that tree stump she

was sitting, worshipping the moon.‟

A roar of coarse laughter interrupted him, and he scowled.

„Laugh all you want, but I know what I saw.‟

„There have been rumours,‟ interposed one of the other men,

scratching his head. „You remember those woodcutters who swore they saw

a young girl running through the trees?‟

„She was so beautiful,‟ murmured the first man. „I‟ve never seen such

beauty. She had hair like fire, all down her back, and she was only dressed

in a sort of shift. Her breasts were standing out beneath it, and her legs were

long and bare.‟

The sweat was breaking out on his forehead as he spoke, and his eyes

bulged. He ran his tongue over his lips.

„She was up and away before I could stop her. I haven‟t been able to

get her out of my mind since. That‟s why I didn‟t come alone, in case she put

the evil eye on me.‟

Tanya



29

The other men exchanged glances, impressed despite themselves.

„Which way did she run?‟ asked a tall, lanky youth.

„Why, that way,‟ he replied and, to Tanya‟s horror, seemed to be

pointing directly at her.

She turned and fled, expecting to hear sounds of pursuit behind her,

but there was none. She sped back to the cave and looked around wildly. It

could only be a matter of time before she was discovered, and she dreaded

to think what would happen to her then. The memory of Dakov‟s daughter

lying in the snow, and Gerda‟s terrified cries burned into her brain, and she

shuddered.

„I have to get away from here,‟ she muttered beneath her breath. „Far

away. But where?‟

She gathered her few belongings together, wrapped herself around

with her shawl, and collected the last few nuts and berries from the depleted

store. Pausing in the cave entrance, she looked down at the grave, tears

pricking her eyes.

„Goodbye, Sten‟ka, dear old friend,‟ she whispered. „I know you won‟t

mind my leaving you, for you once said my destiny was not here, but

somewhere far away. Perhaps you were right. Farewell.‟

She took one last long look around the cave, then pulling her shawl

around her shoulders, set off into the dusk, striding out and resisting any

impulse to look back. Her life here was finished, and she must look forward

now to whatever the future might bring her.

Tanya

30





Chapter 3


Tanya walked and walked, wanting to put as much distance between

herself and the cave as possible. Soon her feet were throbbing, and she was

feeling very tired. As it was now quite dark, she decided to sleep where she

was. It was quite mild during the day, but at night, the wind was chilly, and

she shivered as she ate a handful of berries, and she was glad to pull the

warm fur around her tightly as she snuggled down to sleep.

Nothing having occurred to disturb her slumber, Tanya awoke soon

after dawn, refreshed herself at the stream, then decided to follow its banks

for a while to see where it would lead. After a frugal breakfast of black bread,

washed down with spring water, she set off again. She walked for several

hours, and eventually, the trees grew more scattered and thinned out. As she

left the forest behind her, her spirits lifted unaccountably, and her weary step

quickened a trifle. She started to hum under her breath and to skip a little.

The sun was quite hot overhead, and the birds were singing. The heady, gay

feeling lasted until the sun went down, then she realised just how tired and

hungry she was. In the open, she felt somehow unprotected but shook these

fears off impatiently. She was so hungry that she ate nearly all the remaining

nuts and berries and finished off the loaf completely. She felt guilty when she

looked at her diminished stock, but a full stomach made her able to face the

night, and she was soon sleeping soundly.

The night again passed uneventfully, and she spent another day of

weary plodding, forcing herself to put one foot in front of the other, and to

keep moving. She occasionally passed a small farm or peasant‟s cottage but

gave these a wide berth, for she was very nervous of meeting anyone. That

Tanya

31

night she was lucky enough to find a ruined cottage to sleep in, for she was

now feeling the cold, more through her lack of food than anything. She had

eaten the last of her store at midday, and she spent a night of fitful sleep, for

although she was bone weary, cold and hunger disturbed her rest.

She walked for two more days with practically nothing to eat, and

having left the stream a way back because of its passing near a small village,

she had added thirst to her other miseries. The end of the second day found

her light-headed and at the end of her strength. It was growing dark as she

staggered through a small copse, when her weary eyes fastened on the light

shining through the trees ahead of her. Throwing caution to the winds, she

summoned up her last ounce of strength and made it to the door. With hardly

enough strength to knock, she lost consciousness and sank in a heap

against the rough wood.

When she came to, she was lying on a crude bed made up on the

huge stove, and an old, bent woman was bustling around the inevitable large

cooking pot. A lump came into Tanya‟s throat, and her eyes misted over, for

the room reminded her to a great extent of her old home, although it was

smaller and not nearly as clean. There seemed to be only the one room, and

a pig and goat were snuffling in the far corner, rooting for food. The air was

thick with the smell of cabbage and dung, and the smoke from the stove

swirled around at intervals and made Tanya cough. At the sound, the old

woman looked over her shoulder.

„So you‟re awake, are you?‟ she asked rather brusquely. „I‟ve some

cabbage soup on, you‟d better get some down, though we‟ve little enough to

feed ourselves these days.‟

Tanya

32

She spooned a portion of the soup into a wooden bowl and hobbled

across to Tanya.

„Well, don‟t sit there gawping, girl, take it, before I change my mind!‟

Tanya would have liked to tell the old woman to keep her soup, if she

had so little, but her stomach said otherwise. She was quite ravenous and

felt faint at the sight of the soup. She took the proffered bowl without a word

and fell upon it with little heed of manners or anything else, scooping out the

floating mess with her fingers and licking every drop until the bowl was clean.

She wiped her mouth with the back of her hand and passed the woman the

bowl.

„Thank you,‟ she managed to say and eyed the woman uncertainly,

unable to make her out.

The crone came back to her side with a hunk of bread and a pitcher of

a strong-smelling beverage. She held them out.

„Here, drink this. It‟s kvass, my son made it – it‟s good, will give you

strength.‟ Her black eyes travelled over Tanya from head to toe, making her

feel quite uncomfortable. The crone gave a sudden cackle of laughter,

showing the stumps of several black and rotting teeth.

„Aye, it‟ll give you strength,‟ she repeated. „Like or not, you‟ll need it.‟

Still chuckling under her breath, she shambled away and, sitting on a

rough stool by the stove, began to croon to herself, rocking backwards and

forwards.

Tanya eyed her nervously and devoured the bread. She took a sip of

the mead, which she found rather unpleasant, very sour and strong, but she

was so thirsty she drank every drop. It made her head swim a little, and she

lay back again, keeping half an eye on the old hag.

Tanya

33

After a while, the woman‟s tuneless dirge began to get on her nerves,

and she felt foolish saying nothing, so she sat up and swung her legs over

the side of the stove.

„Where is this place?‟ she asked curiously. „And who are you? I

suppose I should thank you for saving my life. I think I should have died had

you not given me succour.‟

At the sound of her well-modulated voice, the crone stopped her song

abruptly and looked at Tanya sharply.

„Quite the little madam, ain‟t we?‟ she sneered. „Where did you learn

to speak in that la-di-da way? Here, there‟s nobody out looking for you, is

there? Did you get lost?‟

„No, no one,‟ replied Tanya, then instantly regretted it. Something in

the old woman‟s look made her wish she had kept quiet.

„All alone in the world, are you, dearie?‟ asked the woman and gave

her shrill laugh again.

„No, I‟m not, I‟m on my way to relatives, they‟ll be expecting me,‟

Tanya lied, not quite sure why she should prevaricate.

„Ah,‟ nodded the old woman. „And you‟re wandering al alone through

wild country like this. Come now, dearie, you don‟t expect old Anita to believe

that, do you? I wasn‟t born yesterday you know, not old Anita.‟

At this she seemed to lose interest in Tanya, for she turned her

shoulder and began to sing again, ignoring her presence entirely.

Tanya stepped down from the stove and looked around her for her

cloak.

„Well, thank you so much for the food.‟ she said. „I will be on my way

now and will cause you no further trouble.‟

Tanya

34

At this, Anita looked at her slyly out of the corner of her eye.

„No need for that, dearie,‟ she grinned, not moving from her seat. „It‟s

quite dark out, and the wolves are on the prowl tonight. Can‟t you hear the

wolves? Why don‟t you stay for tonight, eh? You can leave in the morning.‟

Feeling rather foolish, and certainly not relishing the thought of the

wolves prowling about outside, Tanya thanked the woman a little stiffly, and,

picking up her fur, returned to the stove and la y down. She was aching all

over and had not realised how tired she was, for she fell asleep almost

immediately.

How long she slept, Tanya was not sure, but it was still dark when she

awoke, and she gave a nervous jump. Someone was standing over her,

holding a candle high. The figure was quite huge and loomed over her in a

manner that seemed to Tanya to be quite threatening. She gave a gasp and

shrank back. The figure lowered the candle, and the light fell on his face. It

was quite a young face that looked down at her, and although he had the

stolid features of the peasant, his expression was kind, and he looked rather

awestruck. Quite suddenly, he held something out to her.

„I‟ve brought you a present,‟ he said abruptly and thrust something

towards her. „Here, take it, it‟s for you.‟

Scarcely knowing what to say or do, Tanya automatically took the

object the young man was offering her. He held the candle up higher,

obviously expecting some reaction, so she peered uncertainly at the present.

It was an embroidered scarf, rather grubby, and obviously second-hand. She

felt oddly touched.

Tanya

35

„Why, thank you,‟ she said in a low voice, thinking perhaps he was a

little simple. „That was very kind of you, but really you didn‟t have to give me

anything.‟

„I wanted to,‟ replied the man and grinned a little foolishly. „I‟ve never

seen anyone half as pretty as you, and I just wanted to give you something. I

didn‟t steal it,‟ he added anxiously, his eyes on her face, as if watching for

her reaction.

„No, no, of course, you didn‟t,‟ said Tanya soothingly. „Well, thank you

again . . . What is your name? Are you Anita‟s son?‟

„Aye, that‟s right,‟ he replied, nodding his big head. „My name‟s

Nicholas. Can I touch you?‟ As he spoke, he put out his hand.

„No!‟ cried Tanya before she could stop herself. He drew back quickly,

as though he had been stung.

„No,‟ she repeated more gently. „Not just now, I‟m very tired.‟

„I‟m sorry.‟ He backed away, face averted. „I‟ll leave you to sleep. Do

you want to keep the present?‟

„Why, yes, if you would like me to.‟

„What‟s your name?‟ he asked shyly.

„Tanya.‟

„It‟s lovely – just like you,‟ he whispered, then abruptly blew out the

candle and plodded over to the far side of the room.

Tanya lay for a long time staring into the darkness, thinking about the

strange young man and wondering what tomorrow would bring.

When she awoke again, she was alone in the room. The sun was high

in the sky, and although she was stiff and aching, she felt better than she

had been since Sten‟ka‟s death.

Tanya

36

Perhaps it is the contact with someone, she thought, and instantly

remembered the events of the night before. She pulled the scarf out and

looked at it doubtfully. It was decidedly grimy and very creased. In fact, it

looked exactly like she felt! More than anything in the world, she wanted a

wash. She looked down at her dress and wrinkled her nose in distaste. That,

too, was filthy.

She jumped out of bed and peered out of the tiny window. It was so

dirty, she could see nothing. She crossed over to the cooking pot and looked

inside. It contained a thin, rather unappetising-looking gruel. She hesitated,

then turned away. No, she couldn‟t help herself, it wouldn‟t be right.

She lifted the latch on the door and pushed. It didn‟t move. She

pushed against it again, harder, but it still wouldn‟t budge. An unreasoning

panic swept over her, and she threw her whole weight against it, but it didn‟t

move an inch. She began to pound on it with her fists, yelling furiously at the

top of her voice. The door opened so suddenly that Tanya fell out, almost

into the arms of the huge figure of Nicholas, who was staring at her as if she

were an apparition. She carried on pounding, only this time on him.

„How dare you lock me in,‟ she panted. „How dare you? I won‟t be kept

anywhere against my will, do you understand, you great lout?‟

He took hold of her wrists and held her off as easily as though she

were a moth beating against him.

„Hold on, now,‟ he said soothingly. „It was for your own protection. My

mother‟s gone into town, and I‟ve been away chopping firewood. I just

propped the log against the door to make sure nothing got in while I was

gone.‟

Tanya

37

„To make sure no one got out, you mean,‟ hissed Tanya, still in a

temper. „What‟s to stop someone lifting it away and coming in?‟

„Nobody else could lift it,‟ replied Nicholas simply.

„Oh!‟ said Tanya, abashed. „Well, I suppose I can give you the benefit

of the doubt. Only don‟t ever do it again, understand?‟

„Not if you don‟t want me to,‟ he promised. „I wouldn‟t do anything you

didn‟t want me to.‟

He stood there, towering over her, looking at her with such patent

admiration in his blue eyes that Tanya blushed and went back into the cabin.

Nicholas was certainly a splendid specimen of young manhood! He

must have been well over six feet four, with broad shoulders and slim hips.

His blond hair curled down on to his shoulders, framing a face that was both

masculine yet somehow gentle. She liked the frank, open way he looked at

her, and if there was a certain simplicity in the clear eyes, that was perhaps

part of the charm.

He followed Tanya into the cabin, stooping almost double to pass

through the low doorway.

„I wondered if I could have some breakfast,‟ said Tanya to fill the

awkward silence that followed the young man‟s declaration.

„Take anything you want,‟ he replied, twisting his hat in his hands and

following her every movement with his eyes.

„Have you eaten?‟ asked Tanya over her shoulder.

„Oh yes, hours ago. But I‟ll have some mead, chopping wood is thirsty

work.‟

„Well, don‟t stand there like a post,‟ ordered Tanya. „Sit down, and I

will pour you some.‟

Tanya

38

He sat on the edge of one of the rough wooden stools, eyes still fixed

on her face. Tanya began to feel uncomfortable and just a little exasperated.

She put the drink in front of him and took her own meal to the other end of

the table. She stole a look at Nicholas from beneath he r lashes. He was still

staring at her quite openly.

„Is something the matter?‟ she asked rather tartly. He gave a start and

looked at her enquiringly. „No, nothing at all.‟

„Well then, I wish you will stop gawping at me as though I were a freak

in a show,‟ she replied with asperity.

It was his turn to look embarrassed, but Tanya bit back the apology

that sprang to her lips. She had no wish to encourage him.

„Is there a stream nearby?‟ she ventured after a moment‟s silence.

„Yes, just through those trees there,‟ he answered a little sullenly.

„Good, I must have a wash, I feel filthy and could do with a freshen up

before I go on my way.‟ She looked at him challengingly on these words, and

he looked down at his feet miserably.

„You can stay as long as you want, until you‟ve recovered your

strength. Which way are you heading?‟

Tanya shrugged. „I don‟t know precisely, but I must find a reasonably

large town where I can find work, I suppose.‟

„You, find work?‟ he said in surprise. „I thought you were a lady.‟

„Well, I suppose I am to a certain extent, but I‟m not afraid of work,

and anyway, I haven‟t any money,‟ said Tanya with devastating frankness.

„Well then, stay here,‟ he pleaded, looking at her hungrily. „You can

help my mother, and we‟ll feed you and give you shelter.‟

Tanya

39

„No, really, I couldn‟t,‟ said Tanya quickly. „I should think your mother

would have something to say about that – and anyway, I want something

more out of life than I can find here. There must be more to life than black

bread, gruel, and second-hand clothes.‟

She had cried this last passionately, forgetting momentarily to whom

she was speaking, and as soon as the words were out of her mouth, she

could have bitten off her tongue.

„Well, if you‟re too high and mighty for them, don‟t take them!‟ he

cried, banging his tankard on to the table and standing up. „Go on then, clear

off and leave me alone, you and your kind, you make me sick!‟

With this, he flung out of the room, slamming the door behind him.

Tanya sat there feeling very ashamed.

„I‟m not used to talking to people, that‟s my trouble,‟ she whispered

ruefully to herself. „I suppose I must go and apologise. But I‟m definitely not

staying here.‟

However, when she reached the door, there was no sign of Nicholas.

With a shrug, she returned to the cabin and gathered together her

belongings.

„At least, I can have a bath,‟ she thought to herself. „And then I‟ll come

back and say sorry, and be on my way.‟

She found the stream with no trouble and, as it was a warm morning,

had no qualms in peeling off her stained and dirty clothes. She left them in a

pile by some bushes and slid into the water. It was colder than she had

thought, and it made her gasp. When she got used to it, however, it was the

most delicious feeling, to be soaking away all the grime, aches, and pains of

the last few days. She swum gently backwards and forwards for a while, until

Tanya

40

she began to feel chilly, then she washed her hair with her precious bar of

soap, which was very meagre by now. She rinsed it through and rung it out,

then stepped up the bank to her clothes. She took one look at the filthy dress

and shift and gave a grimace of disgust.

„I can‟t put those horrid things back on,‟ she thought. „I‟m sure if I rinse

them through, they‟ll dry quick enough, for the sun is quite hot.‟ Throwing

caution to the winds, she soaked them through, then laid them out on a flat

rock to dry.

She wrapped her shawl around her so that it covered her body, but

left her arms free, then began to brush out her hair, drying it in the wind.

Tanya bent over the water to drink and caught sight of a face looking back at

her that surprised her. All traces of childhood had completely left her in these

last few days. The face that she saw reflected was completely that of a

woman, quite flawless in its loveliness. Tanya gazed at herself musingly,

twisting her hair this way and that, trying to make it look something like that

of the almost forgotten lady of the carriage. It was then that the sun was

blocked out, and another reflection appeared above her own. With a

strangled gasp, she leapt to her feet and backed away almost into the water,

pulling her hair over her breast to hide her near-nakedness.

The man who stood regarding her with a horrible leer on his face

looked somehow familiar, but she could not for the moment think who it could

be. But the moment he spoke, it came to her with appalling clarity. He took a

step forward, and his eyes flickered over her in a way that made her skin

crawl.

„So I‟ve found you, little fairy. The others wouldn‟t believe Fedor, they

thought he was mad. But I followed you.‟ His shoulders shook with silent

Tanya

41

laughter. „ I‟ve followed you all this way, and now I‟ ve found you. You‟re just

as beautiful as I remembered – and you won‟t get away this time.‟

As he spoke, he lunged forward and grabbed hold of Tanya‟s hair,

pulling her towards him with surprising strength. She gave a terrified scream

and struggled madly, fighting him with all her strength, but she couldn‟t shake

him off. In the tussle, the shawl fell away, and the sight of her white body

seemed to inflame him to madness. He flung her down to the ground brutally,

and her head cracked against something, stunning her for a moment. He

took advantage of this to run his hands over her body and began to slobber

kisses over her breasts. Tanya came to her senses and screamed again. He

was trying to hold her down with one hand and was fumbling at his belt with

the other. Using every ounce of her strength, Tanya managed to throw him

off, and tried to scramble away, but he caught hold of her hair again, and the

agonising pain made her scream like a wounded animal. He hit her across

her face with the back of his hand, and she almost lapsed into

unconsciousness. She was quite devoid of all strength now and lolled like a

rag doll. She could feel his hands on her and shuddered, sobbing, every

nerve screaming out against this desecration. Then, quite suddenly, the

weight of his body was gone from her like magic. One more scream rent the

air, then all was silent, apart from the strangled sobbing of her breath. As if

through a mist, she saw Nicholas towering over the crumpled body of her

aggressor. She managed to sit up, and her head swum dizzily. When her

eyes focused, she saw that Fedor was quite dead. From the unnatural

position in which he lay, it was obvious that Nicholas must have broken his

neck with his bare hands.

Tanya

42

Quite forgetful of everything, but the fact that he had saved her, she

scrambled up and flung herself into his arms.

„Oh, thank you, thank you,‟ she cried fervently and promptly fainted.

She came to her senses to find Nicholas bathing her face with the

corner of her shawl. Her head was in his lap. She smiled waveringly up into

his face, then, as the shock set in, began to cry again. He picked her up in

his arms as if she was a doll, holdi ng her against his great chest.

„There, there‟ he murmured. „It‟s all over now, no one is going to hurt

you,‟ and as if it was the most natural thing in the world, he bent his head

and kissed her. Tanya returned the kiss, perhaps more fervently than she

meant to, for his lips became more and more demanding, and the blood

began to flame through her body. She flung an arm around his neck, and a

delicious thrill went through her. He laid her down on the bank and ,

murmuring endearments into her ear, began to ca ress her. She shivered in

ecstasy and was on the point of abandonment when the full realisation of

what she was doing flooded over her. With a choked cry she pushed at his

chest, trying to sit up.

„No, no,‟ she moaned. „What are we doing? I can‟t. Please, Nicholas,

please.‟

For a moment it seemed as if he had not heard her, for he continued

to shower kisses on to her face, never slackening his hold.

„Nicholas, Nicholas!‟ panted Tanya, and getting a hand free, she

slapped him full across the face. He looked down at her as if in a trance,

then, shaking his big head, he let her go. His eyes, which had glazed over

with passion gradually cleared, and he gave a shudder. He seemed to come

to himself then and looked at Tanya in dismay.

Tanya

43

„Forgive me, I don‟t know what came over me. I am as bad as he is,

and I‟ve frightened you. Please say you forgive me.‟

„No, no, you haven‟t frightened me, more I‟ve frightened myself,‟ said

Tanya quietly, then, becoming aware of her nakedness, blushed fierily, vainly

trying to cover herself with her hair.

„I‟ll get your clothes,‟ muttered Nicholas, who was looking as

embarrassed as Tanya herself, and getting to his feet, he stumbled off

towards Tanya‟s clothes which were still stretched out on the rocks.

By the time he returned, Tanya‟s heart had stopped beating quite so

violently, and to her dismay and chagrin, she felt horribly sick. With a muffled

exclamation, she disappeared behind a clump of bushes and promptly lost

her breakfast. It was such an anti-climax that she felt an insane desire to

laugh and would undoubtedly have gone into strong hysterics had Nicholas

not returned with her clothes at that moment.

Pulling herself together, she took her clothes and went to sit by the

river whilst she dressed herself, grimacing a little as the dress was still

slightly damp. It wasn‟t until she stood up, feeling rather more herself, that

the horrifying realisation of what had happened flooded over her. Nicholas

had just committed murder for her sake. A man who, just a few minutes ago

had been a living, breathing creature was dead because of her. Despite the

fact that this man had treated her shamefully and had tried to rape her, he

was still dead – and at Nicholas‟s hands! With a fearful glance at the body,

she slipped over to where Nicholas sat, brooding.

„Nicholas,‟ she breathed. „What about him? Whatever shall we do?‟

Tanya

44

For a moment, he looked at her as if he didn‟t know what she was

talking about, then the impact of it all hit him too. He stared in front of him

blindly.

„I didn‟t mean to do it – not to kill him,‟ he whispered brokenly. „But

when I saw him with his filthy hands on you, hitting you and . . . and kissing

you, I just saw red. I don‟t really remember what happened. I was so mad –

and in a way, jealous too,‟ he added, stealing a glance at her. „It was what I

wanted to do – what I‟ve wanted to do ever since I first saw you – to kiss you

and to love you. When I saw him treating you like that, something just

seemed to snap inside me.‟ He looked at her miserably, awaiting her

reaction.

„Well, it‟s no good crying over spilt milk,‟ said Tanya with a firmness

that surprised herself as much as him. „What‟s done is done, and we must

live with it. But we can‟t leave him here, that‟s for sure. We‟ll have to bury

him, and just hope we hear no more about it. He was a miserable little toad,

anyway, even if he is dead, and you shouldn‟t speak ill of the departed.‟

Tanya tossed her head defiantly, as if challenging anyone to disagree

with her, and Nicholas looked at her admiringly.

„I‟ll do it now,‟ he said. „You go back to the house, it‟s no job for a

woman, and you are upset enough already. My mother should be back from

town by now. Tell her I‟ve nearly finished my work and will be home soon. Go

on now.‟

Nothing loath, Tanya left him to his gruesome task and returned to the

cabin. Old Anita had not yet returned, and the stove had gone out. She

busied herself with relighting it and heating up the big pot of soup for the

midday meal. Then, looking around her with a grimace of disgust, she set

Tanya

45

about sweeping the place out and cleaning the dirty bowls and cups that

were piled everywhere. By the time Nicholas returned, everything was

looking quite clean and bright. He looked around him wonderingly.

„Why I‟ve never seen the place look so smart!‟ he exclaimed. „Where‟s

mother?‟

„Not back yet,‟ replied Tanya absently. „Would you like your meal now,

I‟ve heated up the remains of the soup. I don‟t think there‟s any bread left or

anything else much for that matter.‟

„Yes, I‟m hungry. I suppose I shouldn‟t be, but I can‟t help it.‟

„Well, to tell you the truth,‟ confided Tanya, „I‟m starving! I feel quite

guilty about it, but there it is.‟

They looked at one another like naughty children, and then they both

began to laugh. Afterwards, they felt much better and ate up all the remains

of the soup. With a contented sigh, Tanya curled up on the stove and looked

at Nicholas shyly.

„How old are you, Nicholas?‟ she asked. „I‟m nearly seventeen.‟

„I‟m nineteen, I think,‟ replied Nicholas. „I‟m not sure, but my mother

used to scratch a mark on the wall every spring since I was born, and she

tells me there are nineteen. I can‟t count much myself, but she can – and she

can spell out her name,‟ he added proudly. „My father had some learning and

taught her, but he was killed soon after I was born, and she never bothered

with me. She thinks men don‟t need such things – and I suppose she‟s right.‟

He sighed. „I never wished to do anything about it – until now.‟

„I would teach you to write your name – if I was staying, that is,‟ she

added hastily. „But of course, I‟m not, so . . .‟ she trailed off uncomfortably

and jumped down restlessly. „Why do you think your mother is taking such a

Tanya

46

long time?‟ she asked fretfully. „Will she be bringing some provisions back,

there doesn‟t seem to be anything left to eat at all?‟

„There‟s rye and turnips planted out back, we make do. I expect she‟s

visiting, she goes for days sometimes,‟ he answered, looking at her moodily

from under his lashes. „Why won‟t you stay?‟

„Because I can‟t,‟ replied Tanya impulsively. „Don‟t you see, Nicholas,

I just can‟t. I don‟t belong here, I‟m just another mouth to feed, and anyway , I

want to see the world.‟ She looked at him entreatingly and clasped her hands

together nervously. „It‟s not that I don‟t want to stay – part of me does, but . .

. I just can‟t do it. It‟s impossible.‟

„You could marry me, then my mother couldn‟t say anything, and . . .

I‟d take good care of you.‟ He coloured, then looked at her pleadingly.

„Please, don‟t go away. If you do, I‟ll follow you. Wherever you go, I‟ll follow

you.‟

„And your mother?‟ she reminded him quietly. „What of her? She can‟t

manage alone. You couldn‟t possibly leave her.‟

With an impatient exclamation, he flung away from her, striking his fist

into his palm. „I can‟t help it,‟ he cried. „I can‟t live without you, don‟t you

understand that? I wish you had never come here.‟

He almost ran across the room to her side and swept her into his

arms, gazing earnestly down into her eyes. For a moment, blue eyes fought

with green, then hers dropped. „Did you really mean that, about marrying

me?‟ asked Tanya wonderingly. „You only met me yesterday, after all. I might

be a bad-tempered shrew for all you know.‟

He laughed and shook his head. „No, you couldn‟t possibly be,‟ he

replied. „You are too beautiful.‟

Tanya

47

Tanya shook her head and gently pushed him away. „Look, dear

Nicholas,‟ she said quietly. „ I think you are doing me a great honour, and I

thank you from the bottom of my heart. I think you are a wonderful person,

truly I do, very sweet and kind, and you‟ve been so good to me. But I‟m not

ready to marry anyone yet – I don‟t even know my own mind. I don‟t know

what I want to do, or where I want to go. I only know my soul is filled with a

great longing for something – something better out of life than I‟ve had yet.

Perhaps I‟ll never find it – I‟ll probably wish one day I had stayed here with

you and led a good, quiet life. But I have to find out about myself, about – oh,

so many, many things. Do you understand what I‟m trying to say, Nicholas?‟

She looked at him anxiously, her beautiful eyes troubled and bright

with unshed tears. For a moment, it looked as if he would ignore her

impassioned speech and try again to take her into his arms, but with a great

effort, he pulled himself together and turned from her, his great shoulders

bowed as if beneath a weight too heavy even for them. He suddenly looked

very tired, and all his youthful vivacity seemed to drain away from him.

„Yes,‟ was all he said, then turning, stumbled blindly from the room.

Tanya watched him go, with tears pricking at her eyelids. „Poor

Nicholas,‟ she whispered. „I could have loved you if only I had been someone

else. But I have a dream to follow. It will probably lead me nowhere, but I

must follow it.‟

With a heavy heart, she turned away, then, suddenly making up her

mind, swiftly gathered together her belongings. She hesitated over the scarf

that Nicholas had given to her, then thrust it into her bundle. She wished she

had something to leave in payment for all they had done for her and as a

token to Nicholas that she had cared a little. On a sudden impulse, she found

Tanya

48

a knife and, rather inexpertly, chopped off a lock of her hair. Leaving it on

Nicholas‟s bed, she gave one last swift look around and then opened the

door carefully, peering around to see if anyone was in sight. The clearing

was quite deserted, so she closed the door behind her and set off in the

opposite direction to which she had arrived the night before.

„Was it only yesterday?‟ she wondered. „So much has happened, it

seems like a hundred years ago!‟ With a last, half-regretful look over her

shoulder, she set her face resolutely into the sun, in the direction that

Nicholas had told her led to the nearest town. She walked with a heavy heart

for the first couple of miles, with much glancing over her shoulder to see if

she was being followed, but no one came in sight, and she hardly knew

whether to be glad or sorry.

After several hours of hard walking through the same flat uninteresting

landscape, the spires and buildi ngs of quite a sizeable town came into view.

As the hour was now quite advanced, she quickened her pace a little,

wishing to reach the relative safety of the walls before the gates we‟re closed

for the night. She joined a stream of peasants and farmers, some driving

animals, most just plodding stolidly along. Soon she was inside the city

gates. She stood still for a moment, jostled and pushed, undecided what to

do next. She had no money at all, and her situation was awkward to say the

least. She enquired the name of the town from a fat farmer, who informed

her indulgently that it was Dorpat.

She had heard of Dorpat, but it was the largest town she had ever

visited, and she stared around her with wide eyes. It was a large, bustling

city, and the rows and rows of buildings, built mostly of wood, crowded close

together within the walls and seemed to close in on Tanya after the fresh

Tanya

49

open spaces outside. A variety of smells assailed her nostrils, most of them

unpleasant, but she could not help but be aware of the tempting aroma of

fresh bread and the trays of various foods being hawked by the loud-voiced

vendors. She became aware of just how hungry she was after her long walk

and also of her vulnerability in this strange town. For a moment, she was

swept by a feeling of panic and an almost overwhelming urge to turn and flee

back to Nicholas, but she pulled herself sternly together, her common sense

asserting itself. Evening was closing in, and her first task was to find shelter

for the night. As she would also need food, the obvious thing to do was to

look for work of some kind. Tanya was uncomfortably aware of the small

variety of jobs available for a young girl alone and, after some deliberation,

decided to look for a good-sized clean inn and offer her services there in

whatever capacity was available.

Having made her decision, and not being one to dally, she asked a

passing woman to direct her to the nearest respectable inn and set off in the

direction indicated. She found it easily enough and was relieved to see that it

was obviously one of the better class hostelries of the town. Taking a deep

breath, she walked rather nervously through the imposing front entrance.

A short, rather plump, little man came bustling out, rubbing his hands,

but the smile of welcome faded when he saw Tanya standing there.

„What do you want here, girl?‟ he asked rather testily.

Tanya took stock of the man and decided she liked what she saw. His

face was honest and open, if a trifle irritable just now.

„I‟m seeking employment, sir,‟ she replied, in her quiet, cultured voice.

He gave her a swift scrutinising look and then told her to go round to

the side door, with muttered strictures of wenches who didn‟t know their

Tanya

50

place. He was surprised by a haughty look from a pair of flashing green eyes

and said more mildly that his wife would see if there was anything for her.

Tanya found her way to the side entrance, picking her way through

the rubbish in the street, her little nose wrinkled in distaste. She crossed the

courtyard and, upon entering, found herself in a large, very hot kitchen,

confronted by a very fat lady with rosy cheeks and a pleasant, kindly face.

„So you want work, do you, dearie?‟ she said doubtfully. „Well, I don‟t

know I‟m sure. What can you do?‟

„Oh, I‟ll do anything,‟ replied Tanya eagerly. „I‟m not afraid of hard

work, and you see, I have no money at all, and I‟ve nowhere to go. Do,

please, say you have something.‟

„Well, we‟ll give you a try, if you‟re not proud,‟ replied the woman

kindly. „It‟s hard work, but you‟ll get board and keep. You can start right now

by scouring out those pans over there.‟ She indicated a slovenly girl who was

scrubbing at the floor rather apathetically. „That‟s Ingrid. You can sleep with

her. She‟ll show you where to go later.‟

With a nod of her head, she swept out, leaving Tanya feeling rather

stunned and uncertain whether she was glad or sorry to be taken on as a

kitchen maid.

„Oh well,‟ she thought philosophically. „Beggars can‟t be choosers.‟

And with a shrug of her shoulders , she set to work.

The light was quite gone by the time she had finished, and her arms

and back were aching. Ingrid appeared to be still scrubbing the same patch

of floor, and she hadn‟t uttered a word since Tanya had entered the room.

Tanya eyed her uncertainly.

Tanya

51

„Will there be anything else, do you think?‟ she asked. „And is there

anything to eat?‟

The girl indicated a large cooking pot in the corner, and Tanya helped

herself to the steaming broth it contained. It was delicious, and she ate

ravenously, enjoying every mouthful. At last, her hunger appeased, she leant

back and regarded the girl, who was now sitting in the corner, staring

vacantly in front of her.

„Well, is there any more work to do, or can we go to bed now?‟ asked

Tanya, who could hardly keep her eyes open now.

„Aye, go to bed,‟ nodded Ingrid, staring dully at Tanya. „Have to be up

at dawn, you‟ll need all the sleep you can get.‟ She sniffed and sat back on

her heels, regarding Tanya disinterestedly.

„Well, where do I go?‟ asked Tanya impatiently, thinking the girl was

undoubtedly a little simple.

„Aye, I‟ll show you.‟ She heaved herself up and shuffled out the door,

not bothering to see if Tanya was following or not. With a shrug, she picked

up her bundle and stepped out into a long, narrow passage. She followed her

companion up the flight of wooden stairs, and into a part of the house that

was well decorated and quite opulent. Ranging all along the passages were

many doors. As they passed them, Ingrid nodded her head at them.

„Guest rooms,‟ she remarked. „There‟s lots more on the other side of

the house too. Not supposed to come up this way, but I like it,‟ she

continued, with a sly smile. She rubbed her hand along the polished wood.

„It‟s nice here. This is a big place, this is. We get lots of guests – quite

important ones, some of them. Not that I get to see any of them, being in the

Tanya

52

kitchen all day long.‟ She sniffed again and lapsed back into what Tanya was

beginning to think must be her customary silence.

She led the way up to the top of the house, where it gradually grew

more shabby, although it was still clean. Ingrid indicated a rather rickety

looking step-ladder and started to climb it.

„Servants rooms up here,‟ she said laconically. Tanya traversed the

ladder without difficulty and followed Ingrid into what at first she took for a

large cupboard!

„You‟ll be in here with me,‟ Ingrid informed her, and Tanya realised

that this was, for a while at least, to be her new home! The room was almost

pitch dark, what little light there was filtering through the tiny, rather dirty

window, and she could just make out a pile of covers.

„That‟s my bed,‟ said Ingrid. She pointed to the other corner, just

discernible to Tanya‟s straining eyes. „You can sleep there.‟

Without another word, she curled up like an animal and was soon

snoring loudly.

Tanya‟s heart sank, and she lay down quietly, wrapping herself up in

her fur, disdaining to use the dirty cover provided, even though it was quite

cold in the attic for the time of year.

„I might just as well have stayed with Nicholas,‟ she thought dismally,

then resolutely put him out of her mind. „No, I must make my own life. Things

will get better. Something will turn up . I shan‟t stay here for ever. Things will

look brighter in the morning.‟

Without further ado, she was soon sunk in an exhausted slumber, to

dream of Nicholas, dead bodies, and cooking pots, all mixed up in her

jumbled thoughts.

Tanya

53





Chapter 4


Tanya eased her aching muscles and grimaced, pushing back a strand of

hair from her eyes. She sat back on her heels and sighed. She had just

finished scrubbing the kitchen floor, and she felt so weary, it was an effort to

move. She had been at The Cock Inn for a month now, but it seemed more

like a year. She had never dreamed that life could consist of so much

drudgery. Day after day, she rose at dawn and worked through to dusk, with

hardly a break and not a great deal to eat. But what was most heartbreaking

to Tanya was that unless some unforeseen miracle occurred, the future held

nothing at all for her.

„I can‟t go on like this, day after day, with nothing to look forward to,

and no hope of anything better,‟ she thought despondently, then hurriedly

began to heave the big bucket of dirty water up, to empty it in the yard, for

Dame Katya was just bustling in the door, and although she was kind enough

in her own fashion, she would brook no laziness or disobedience.

„Ah, there you are, Tanya,‟ she cried. „Leave that bucket there for Ingrid

and follow me immediately!‟

She swept out of the room, and Tanya, with a bewildered glance at the

unfortunate Ingrid, shrugged her shoulders and followed her quickly, almost

running to keep up with the innkeeper‟s wife.

„Come on, girl, come on, no time to waste. Quickly, get in here.‟ She

pushed Tanya into a room at the end of the passage from the kitchen. She

looked around her dazedly.

„What is it, Dame Katya?‟ she asked wonderingly. „Have I done

something wrong? What‟s happening?‟



Tanya

54

„Let‟s have less of your questions, my girl, and just you get those

dirty old rags off.‟

„I beg your pardon,‟ replied Tanya, „but these dirty old rags happen to

be the only clothes I possess,‟ she spoke hotly, not really caring, as all the

old dear could do was to send her packing, after all.

„Now, now, don‟t get on your high ropes. One of our upstairs maids has

been found pilfering in the guest rooms. Never have I been so ashamed. In

our hostelry too! We have a reputation to live up to you know. I told my

husband not to trust her when she first came here, over a year ago now.

Heaven only knows how much she has stolen in that time. I thought she had

a shifty look about her, and I am a fair judge in such matters. But no, he

always was one for a well-turned ankle and never could resist a pretty face.‟

She sniffed and gave a look that boded ill for her absent spouse. „But never

mind all that,‟ she continued. „What matters is that he‟s picked you to take

her place, rather than get a stranger in, and you‟ ve shown you are a hard

worker. I‟m sure we can trust you, for you seem like a good worker, there‟s

no doubt of it, and your manners are quite above the average. You‟ll make a

good maid, and it‟s a step up in the world, I take it you don‟t mean to refuse?‟

„Oh no, Dame Katya,‟ breathed Tanya, her eyes like stars. „It‟s what

I‟ve been dreaming of for so long. Something will come of it, I just know it. I

knew I wouldn‟t have to spend the rest of my life scrubbing floors. That‟s not

what I was meant for, of that much I‟m sure!‟

Dame Katya sniffed again. „Yes, well, I don‟t know about all that, but

one thing I can tell, you will come of it is a bit of money for you and a decent

set of clothes.‟ She put her hands on her hips and glowered at Tanya. „And

right now, it means less chatter and more action. Let‟s get you bathed and



Tanya

55

dressed, ready for my husband to inspect. He has to give his approval you

know, before he will allow you to start. He‟s very particular about the maids

who wait on the guests – we have some very important ones you know, and

everyone likes to see a pretty face. Not that there‟s any chance of anyone

taking you as other than very pretty – too pretty if you ask me!‟ She shook

her head and set about the task of readying Tanya for her new post.

There was no doubt in the good innkeeper‟s eyes when Tanya was

presented to him an hour later. She was looking quite lovely in the simple

black dress and white apron and cap that were to be her uniform from now

on. He looked her over appreciatively and smiled broadly.

„Charming, quite charming,‟ he avowed, then, catching his wife‟s eye,

hastily backed away. „Yes, yes, you will do just fine,‟ he said. „My wife will

show you your duties. You will be a most attractive addition to my staff.‟

He bustled away, after one last roguish look that caused his wife to

stiffen and look suspiciously at Tanya. On meeting her clear, enquiring eyes,

however, she relaxed a little and beckoned to her.

„Come, my girl, I will show you what you have to do.‟

The next few weeks were busy, yet quite happy ones for Tanya. She

was moved out of her attic and given a bed in the maid‟s quarters. She

shared the room with three other girls, all of whom seemed to take an instant

dislike to her. One, Mathilda, a dark, sultry beauty, with long eyes like a cat‟s,

seemed positively to hate her. The other two, Olga and Sonja, both plain,

cheerful girls, just followed her lead. Neither showed her any enmity, they

just tended to ignore her. However, as most of the time they were together in

the room they were sleeping, this did not worry Tanya unduly. She was still

revelling in her new-found luxury. She was allowed a bath once a week, and



Tanya

56

although the others quite plainly thought she was mad for taking it, she did

so religiously and loved every minute of it. She would never lose her love of

soaking in hot water, she was sure. That first bath, and being able to wash

her hair and braid it up becomingly had seemed to her like heaven. She was

given new undergarments and a change of dress to enable her to wash it

every week.

When she had looked into the mirror – an unaccustomed luxury –

before being taken before Pieter Denkov, the innkeeper, she had felt quite

satisfied with her appearance. Indeed, it left little to be desired! Her hair was

shining and glowed with copper tints, and her huge green eyes were

sparkling with anticipation. Her skin was glowing with health, and her figure,

although a little thin after the privations of the past months, was perfect. She

had a shrewd idea that it was for this reason that Mathilda had taken such an

instant dislike to her. She was sure that if she was plain and uninteresting

like the other two girls, she would have been welcomed with open arms.

Her duties consisted mainly of serving meals and drinks to individual

guests in their chambers and waiting on trave llers in the private dining

rooms, and occasionally she was asked to serve drinks in the taproom. She

did not enjoy this quite so much, as it was not pleasant to be for ever ,

warding off amorous advances from drunken customers, and she was quite

unable to slap away fumbling hands with the laughing ease of Mathilda. She

would blush to the roots of her hair, and several times, her fingers itched to

slap a leering face. Only the threat of being relegated back to the kitchens

stopped her. However, Pieter seemed to understand her somehow, and after

the first couple of occasions, she was not asked to serve there again. Dame

Katya might grumble when they were shorthanded, but Pieter would shake



Tanya

57

his head and mumble, „Can‟t be done, Katya, she‟s a lady, for all she‟s

working for us. Can‟t expect it of her.‟

The fact that Tanya had been scrubbing floors for the first month of her

employment, he disregarded entirely, merely mumbling that, as then, he had

had no idea of her potential. His wife began to worry a little, for the girl‟s

flawless beauty caused her to wonder, whereas girls like Mathilda she

understood well. However, when one night, he confided to her that Tanya

was just like the daughter he had always dreamed about, but with which his

wife had unfortunately been unable to present him, her tensions eased a lot ,

and she was able to greet Tanya with equanimity. Tanya‟s good terms with

her employers did not go unnoticed, and there was much muttering of

favouritism behind her back, but as she merely ignored all gossip, seeming

to consider herself above it all, this gave her persecutors little satisfaction.

The months slipped by, and Tanya was happy enough, although every

now and then, she would stop and wonder if she should not be thinking of

moving on or trying for something a little better, but she knew the affection

her employers had for her – indeed, she was very fond of both of them – and

she would push the thoughts into the background for a while.

One morning, there was great excitement at The Cock Inn. Dame

Katya informed the servants that a very great nobleman was coming to stay

for a few days, with a large entourage, on his way to the court, to negotiate

with the king.

„He has been sent from Moscow by Tsar Peter himself,‟ she exclaimed

excitedly, and Tanya could not help but wonder where she got her

information from. „He is said to be very high in court circles and trusted

implicitly by the Tsar. Our good King Charles, however, is away at present,



Tanya

58

but will return through our town, and the Russian has to wait for an

audience.‟ She nodded her head in satisfaction. „No doubt a ploy to show

that Sweden does not fear the might of Muscovy. Anyway, he has been

given permission to cross the border and has chosen our inn in which to

await His Majesty‟s summons. We are famous for our good fare here, you

know, and diplomatic parties have often stayed here in the past, en route to the

capital.‟ She folded her hands over her stomach with a self-satisfied smile, then

seeing that her audience was suitably impressed, she clapped her hands

sharply. „So, to work! There is much preparation to be done.‟

She swept away to issue orders for the comfort of their prospective guest,

leaving the servants buzzing with excitement.

„Oh, I hope I‟m chosen to serve his meals,‟ gasped Mathilda, her eyes

narrowing as if in anticipation of something more than just that.

Tanya left them talking, her own mind in a whirl. A Russian nobleman!

Her lip curled. Perhaps he was related in some way to the man Sten‟ka had

killed, or perhaps to the Cossacks who had wrecked her own life and brutally

murdered her family.

„And even if not, their blood is the same,‟ she muttered savagely under

her breath. „I hate them all, every one.‟

Ironically, Pieter approached her that evening and informed her that

she was to have the honour of attending upon the nobleman during his stay.

„His lineage is ancient and honourable,‟ he beamed. „And he‟s coming to my

inn. It is a great honour indeed. Mind you, the people in this town have no love

for Russia, so I doubt he will go abroad much during his stay – it would be a

stain on our country‟s honour were anything to happen to him. But there, nothing



Tanya

59

will, I am sure. And The Cock has been chosen because it is the finest and

largest inn for many miles around. Is it not wonderful?‟

„Wonderful?‟ whispered Tanya. „Wonderful? I don‟t think you had better let

me serve him, sir, for not only would it be a stain on the honour of our country,

it would be a stain on my soul were I to commit murder, and by all the saints, I

swear to you that had I the chance, I would do so. Do you understand?‟

Her voice was rising, and she was panting with emotion. Pieter looked at her

in astonishment. „Why, my child, you don‟t know him, you couldn‟t possibly have

ever met him before in your life, and yet you talk of murder. Why in God‟s name,

would a sweet innocent like you have so much hate for a man?‟

„Not for him in particular,‟ admitted Tanya. „But for the whole race. My life

and the lives of my family and of a very dear friend were wrecked, brutally and

needlessly by the Russians. Just don‟t ask me to go near him, that‟s all I ask.

You won‟t make me go near him, will you, sir?‟

Pieter looked very disappointed, but he nodded his head. „Very well,

Tanya, it shall be as you wish,‟ he sighed. „I will instruct Mathilda to wait on

him. But I should have liked you to have the honour of . . . oh, well, never

mind.‟ Seeing her eyes flash scornfully, the good man broke off and trotted

away, muttering under his breath of ungrateful wenches who would not do as

they were bid.

Tanya went about the rest of her duties automatically for the rest of the

day. The place was in a turmoil, with people rushing here and there, all

pandering to the needs of their expected guest.

„He is to arrive the day after tomorrow,‟ Mathilda informed them that

night in bed. „His name is Prince Erik Mensherikovsky, and I have been

chosen to serve him.‟ She flashed a triumphant, pitying glance at Tanya, who



Tanya

60

was hard put not to inform her pithily that the honour would not have been

hers at all if not for her, but she bit the words back, considering them

unworthy of her.

The next two days went very quickly, for there was much preparation

to be done, and the notice was short. The Prince was travelling with a small

party of fellow countrymen, and the whole of the upper floor was to be

reserved for him. This meant that several guests had to be moved from the

upper floor to other rooms, which was accompanied by much grumbling and

fuss. However, the great day eventually dawned with everything in

readiness, and Pieter and Dame Katya were hovering anxiously near the

hall, awaiting the arrival of the party. Tanya had asked to go into town to do

some shopping for the cook, as she had no wish to be present in the line of

servants waiting to welcome Prince Mensherikovsky.

She finished her shopping and returned to the inn, entering through the

kitchen door, and depositing her basket on the table. She was unable to stop

herself asking the cook if the Prince had arrived yet.

„Aye, he‟s arrived and yelling for his dinner already,‟ he replied sourly,

sweating over a huge dish of steaming fish and a large suckling pig tur ning

slowly on the spit. „Keep that spit turning, boy‟ he yelled, cuffing the small

kitchen boy round the ear. „Turn it faster, if it‟s burnt, I‟ll put you on it

afterwards.‟ He pushed Tanya to one side, pulling her purchases out of the

basket. „All right, you can go,‟ he said, giving her cheek a pinch. She left

quickly, for the sight of the grotesquely fat cook trying to be romantic with her

always made her want to laugh, and she was terrified that one day she

would, and the last thing she wanted to do was to hurt his feelings, for he

had always been very kind to her, as had all the male members of the staff.



Tanya

61

She went to find Dame Katya to find out what she was required to do.

She was set to polishing up the plate for the dining room, which took her the

rest of the morning and a good half of the afternoon. Mathilda came in,

preening herself, just as she was finishing.

„Well, well, Tanya, finished polishing?‟ she asked with a sneer. „Don‟t

you want a description of the great man? I‟ve been talking with him over

dinner, for he doesn‟t stand on ceremony at all, and I could see he desired

me greatly.‟ She gave her skirt a self-satisfied twitch and looked at Tanya

narrowly. „Well?‟ she asked impatiently. „Have you lost your tongue? Don‟t

tell me you‟re not dying of curiosity, for I shan‟t believe it.‟

Tanya sighed. „Very well, Mathilda, tell me all about it,‟ she said

resignedly, for she would get no peace, she knew, until she had let the girl

gloat over her for a while. Mathilda perched on the edge of the table.

„Well, he‟s not exactly handsome,‟ she began. „But he‟s very striking in

a sinister sort of way. He sends shivers down my spine. He‟s very masterful

and seems used to having his every command obeyed at once. He‟s just the

sort of man I . . .‟ she broke off, looking at Tanya from under her lashes. „But

you wouldn‟t know anything about that, would you, little miss milk and

water?‟ she sneered. „You wouldn‟t know what to do with a man if one landed

in your lap.‟ She threw her head back, her whole body somehow exuding

sensuality so that Tanya dropped her eyes, uncomfortable in spite of herself.

„But I know how to handle him, and I‟ll have him before he leaves, you wait

and see. Perhaps I‟ll get him to take me with him – away from this dump, to

excitement and adventure. I‟d do anything to get out of here.‟ She stopped,

as if becoming aware of saying more than she had meant to and threw

Tanya a challenging look. „Well, we shall see,‟ she said abruptly and jumped



Tanya

62

off the table. „I must go. You can get the less interesting details from

someone else. You must be about the only one in the place who hasn‟t seen

him.‟

„By my own choice,‟ flashed Tanya before she could stop herself.

„Believe me I have no wish to.‟

It was obvious that Mathilda did not believe her, but she didn‟t really care

what she thought and let her leave the room without saying any more.

In spite of everything, she couldn‟t help but see Mathilda‟s point of

view. She herself was desperate to get out of the humdrum life she was

leading, to have a bit of colour and excitement in her life. Although she hated

herself for agreeing with the girl, she had to admit that it seemed to be the

only way out. But the thought of selling herself was completely abhorrent to

Tanya, and she shrugged her shoulders, telling herself that something would

turn up, although in her heart she knew that it was extremely unlikely. She

was still feeling in this frame of mind when Mathilda came breezing into their

room that evening, humming under her breath, and looking very pleased with

herself.

„What are you looking so happy about, Mathilda?‟ asked Olga

tentatively, for Mathilda‟s moods were uncertain. Tonight, however, she

didn‟t seem to resent the question.

„Oh, just something I‟ve been working on seems to be coming out

right,‟ she answered airily, and it seemed to Tanya that she was talking

directly to her, and not to Olga at all. She refused to say any more, and the

girls soon settled down for the night. Tanya lay awake for a long time,

thoughts jumbling together in her brain. She felt ashamed of herself for even

contemplating such action as Mathilda was envisaging, but nevertheless, her



Tanya

63

body was disturbed by strange emotions, and the memory of Nicholas came

back to her – why, she couldn‟t think, except that he was the only man who

had ever held her in his arms. Perhaps that was the reason. The thought that

she was going through that which every young girl experiences at least once

in her life did not enter her head. Her feelings made her hot all over, and she

felt vaguely uncomfortable at some of her memories. Also, she couldn‟t

forget the look that had been in the eyes of the man who had followed her all

the way from the cave – all that way! Did she really have that sort of power?

Power to bring a man to his death, in fact.

She eventually fell into a fitful sleep, tossing and turning, until some

movement or noise awoke her suddenly. She sat up, her heart beating

loudly, straining her eyes in the darkness. Just then, the moon sailed out

from behind a cloud, and although the light it shed was not great, it was

enough to enable her to see that whilst both Olga and Sonja were sleeping

soundly in their beds, Mathilda‟s was empty. Scarcely knowing why she did

so, Tanya slid out of bed, slipped her dress over her head, and, with her hair

streaming down her back and her feet bare, opened the door cautiously and

stepped out into the corridor. She cast a swift glance to right and left, but all

was quite silent. The strange prompting seemed to direct her steps in the

direction of the top floor, for she was quite certain that it was there that

Mathilda had gone. She had no idea of the time, or how long ago the girl had

left, but she felt she just had to know where she had gone, and why. She

descended the stairs from the servant‟s quarters, her heart thumping so fast,

it made her quite breathless. She trod softly down the corridor, then stopped,

feeling a little foolish, trying to decide what to do next. She had just made her

mind up to leave, and go back to bed, when the sound of a door opening



Tanya

64

made her gasp and slide quickly into the window embrasure, pressing herself

back into the curtains. She heard low voices murmuring and saw two

shadowy forms go by. Their footsteps dwindled away until all was quiet

again. She waited for a few minutes, straining her ears for any further noise.

When she heard nothing, she stepped stealthily out and tiptoed along the

corridor towards the stairs. Glancing over her shoulder to ensure she was not

observed, she was just about to run up the stairs when she cannoned into

somebody, and a vice-like arm clamped around her cruelly, so she was quite

unable to move. She gave a terrified cry, and struggled madly, but made no

impression on her assailant.

„Please let me go,‟ she whispered, for the grip on her arms was hurting

her considerably. There was a startled exclamation, and the grip relaxed a

little so that it no longer hurt so badly, but nonetheless, still held her firmly.

Without a word, the mystery figure picked her up bodily, and, slinging her

over his shoulder, strode down the corridor. Tanya was really too surprised

to move, for this was the last thing she had expected. She heard a door open

and shut, then she was set down none too gently. She found herself

confronted by a tall, very dark man, who was regarding her rather

sardonically, yet with admiration in his eyes, his lips pursed in a soundless

whistle.

„And who do we have here?‟ he asked in an authoritative voice, looking

her up and down in a way that made Tanya feel as if she were naked. She

blushed and pulled her dress up round her shoulders, for it had slipped in the

tussle. When she didn‟t answer, he gave an impatient exclamation and

frowned.



Tanya

65

„Well, are you dumb, wench?‟ he barked. „I asked you a question. What

is your name, and why are you sneaking around spying, a t this time in the

morning?‟

„I‟m not spying,‟ retorted Tanya indignantly, her eyes flashing at the

thought. „I‟ ve never spied on anyone in my life. I awoke, saw Mathilda – she‟s

one of the maids – had gone, so I went looking for her.‟

„I am well aware of who Mathilda is,‟ he answered with an unpleasant

laugh. „She has but just this minute left me, to return to her bed.‟

„Oh.‟ Tanya‟s hands flew up to her cheeks, and she blushed even more

furiously. „Then you must be . . .‟

„Prince Mensherikovsky,‟ he finished for her. „But you haven‟t

answered my question. Who are you? Surely not a maid?‟

Upon her nodding an affirmative, he smiled broadly and took a step

towards her. „So why haven‟t I seen you before? That fool of a landlord

should know that I only want the best to wait on me – and you are

undoubtedly the tastiest morsel I‟ve seen in a very long time. What is your

name?‟

„Tanya,‟ she replied, backing towards the door. „And I really should be

going, Mathilda will be wondering where I am.‟

The Prince gave a little laugh and stepped between her and the door.

„But why the hurry, my beauty?‟ he murmured. „We‟ve only just been

introduced. Can‟t you be a little friendly?‟ As he spoke, he stretched out a

hand and took a handful of her hair, pulling her towards him none too gently.

He gazed down into the lovely face upturned to his and took her chin in his

free hand. „God, but you‟re beautiful,‟ he said thickly „and your hair is just like

fire, I‟ve never seen anything like it. And those eyes!‟ He let go of her hair



Tanya

66

and slid his arm around her waist until she was held close against his chest.

She put her hands against it, pushing ineffectually. „Please, sir, let me go,‟

she pleaded, throwing her head back and gazing up at him with wide

frightened eyes.

„Ask anything but that, fair Tanya, and it shall be yours,‟ he replied,

then, bending his head, he kissed her. He kissed her long and thoroughly,

and with a great deal o f experience, s o that Tanya‟s struggles eventually

ceased, and she even allowed herself to relax against him. He forced her

mouth open, and his lips were hard on hers until they felt bruised and sore.

At last, he released her, and she staggered back against the wall, her brain

reeling. He looked at her triumphantly, his hard eyes dark with passion.

„So, not so much of the iceberg as you would have me believe, eh?‟ He

turned away from her and picked up two glasses, reaching for the wine bottle,

and in doing so seemed to break the spell. In a flash, Tanya had wrenched

open the door and was running down the corridor as fast as she could. She

heard him shout behind her, but now she was up the stairs and the following

footsteps stopped. She ran on back down the corridor until she reached her

room and flung herself through the door, closing it behind her and leaning

against it, panting. She saw Mathilda‟s form, sitting up in bed, and even

through the darkness, she could somehow feel the malevolence of the girl‟ s

stare.

„So,‟ said a sarcastic voice. „You‟re not so prim a s you‟d have us

believe. Who have you been visiting tonight, my pretty? One of the

stablehands? Or maybe Master Pieter himself, eh?‟ The insult was very clear

in her tone, and Tanya could feel her temper rising.



Tanya

67

„It’s none of your business,‟ she snapped. „And anyway, you can‟t talk,

for your bed was empty when I left here.‟

‘Yes, but I make no secret of it,‟ replied Mathilda swiftly. „You are so

much worse, trying to make everyone believe butter wouldn‟t melt in your

mouth. Anyway, I really care very little who you‟ ve been bestowing your

favours on. It couldn‟t be anyone half as interesting as I have been with, I

ca n assure you.‟

Tanya was relieved that Mathilda did not suspect the real truth, so she

let it go, just shrugging her shoulders and, slipping her dress over her head,

slid down into her bed and turned her back on the girl.

She dozed fitfully for the rest of the night, her sleeping moments

inundated with strange dreams, and she was looking rather heavy eyed

when she arose with the others in the dim, grey light of early morning.

My, my you‟re looking tired this morning, dear, didn‟t you sleep well?

said Mathilda maliciously.

„No, I suppose it was all the noise you made, going in and out,‟ replied

Tanya sweetly and beat a strategic retreat before Mathilda could think of a

suitable rejoinder.

When she got downstairs, it was to find Dame Katya waiting for her,

arms folded, and a stern expression on her usually placid face.

„Well, young lady, and what have you to say for yourself?‟ she asked,

frowning.

„What . . . what do you mean?‟ asked Tanya rather nervously,

wondering if Dame Katya could possibly have heard of last night‟s escapade.

„Well, I don‟t precisely know – all I do know is that Prince

Mensherikovsky had his valet waylay my husband before he had hardly got



Tanya

68

his eyes open to command him to arrange for Tanya to serve him for the

remainder of his stay here.‟

Tanya‟s heart gave a sickening lurch, and the colour fled from her

cheeks.

„Oh no, no, I don‟t have to, do I, Dame Katya?‟ she gasped imploringly.

„Well, of course you have to, girl,‟ she replied impatiently. „Do you

imagine Pieter is going to snap his fingers in the Prince‟s face, and say no,

Your Highness? Pah! I don‟t know what sort of tricks you‟ve been up to, but I

thought better of you. How did he come to know of your existence, you seem

to have been quite successful up to now in keeping out of sight?‟

Tanya would have dearly liked to blurt out the truth and, in fact, very nearly

did so, but much as she disliked Mathilda, she could not bring herself to be

the cause of her losing her livelihood, which would most certainly be the

outcome if Dame Katya learnt the whole story. She hung her head.

'I wish I could tell you, but I can‟t,‟ she said miserably and flushed as

the good woman looked scornfully at her, her lip curling a little. „It‟s not what

you think, I promise you, really it‟s not – I have no more wish to serve him

now than I did before, it was just unfortunate circumstances. Never mind, I

suppose I must make the best of it. Perhaps he‟ll be gone sooner than we

think, especially if the king comes back early.‟

„Rid yourself of the notion that we want any such thing ,‟ snorted Dame

Katya. „He‟s spending enough to keep us for the rest of the year in luxury,

and we‟ve no wish for his early departure. Well, well, you‟ve made your bed,

as the saying goes, and now you must lie on it. He‟s an early riser, most

unusual for his kind, and likes a hearty breakfast. Cook has it all ready on



Tanya

69

that tray over there. I expect he‟ll want something else too, he usually sends

Mathilda back down for something or other that‟s not quite right.‟

Tanya, just picking up the tray, gave a guilty start. In the initial shock,

she had quite forgotten Mathilda. She would be furious! She carried the tray

carefully out, but before she could reach the stairs, she encountered

Mathilda, arms akimbo, blocking her path, a stormy look on her face.

„Where do you think you‟re going with that?‟ she hissed, almost

snarling in Tanya‟s face. „That‟s the Prince‟s breakfast tray, and it‟s my job.

Hand it over.‟

Before Tanya could move, she tried to wrest the tray from her grasp.

She gave a startled cry and just managed to retain her grip on it. „Are you

mad?‟ she cried furiously. „Let go, you fool, you‟ll make me drop it.‟

Before Mathilda could answer, Dame Katya‟s voice came from behind

them.

„Mathilda! By the bones of the saints, what do you think you‟re playing

at, girl? Let Tanya pass and come here immediately. I‟ve work for you.‟

For a moment, so blind was her rage, it seemed that the girl would

ignore Dame Katya and strike Tanya, then she managed to pull herself

together with a tremendous effort. Casting a look of venomous dislike at her,

Mathilda let go and stood aside. Tanya hurried up the stairs, more shaken by

the episode than she cared to admit. She was still trembling when she

reached Prince Mensherikovsky‟s apartments, and she stood for a moment,

collecting herself, before she ventured a timid knock on the oak panelling.

„Enter,‟ called an imperious voice, and Tanya opened the door, aware

that her heart was thumping so hard, it was making her feel quite sick. She



Tanya

70

entered with her eyes lowered and, putting down the tray, sketched a brief

curtsey and turned to go.

„I have not yet dismissed you,‟ continued the hateful voice, and Tanya

folded her hands before her and waited, eyes still obstinately looking at the

floor. The silence was long drawn out, and no movement being apparent,

she ventured to peep through her lashes towards the bed. The Prince was

sitting on it, attired in a silk dressing gown of so bright and varied a hue that it

was quite dazzling to the eye. She looked down again, stifling a mad desire

to laugh out loud, why she couldn‟t have said.

„Don‟t stand there like a stock, girl, pour out my chocolate, and quick

about it,‟ commanded her tormentor. She curtsied again and obeyed him, but

a rising anger made her hand shake, and she had to fight not to spill some of

the scalding liquid. Suddenly, she felt a finger under her chin, and her head

was inexorably raised, until she was gazing into the dark, swarthy features of

the Prince.

„But why are you trembling, fair maiden?‟ he mocked. „Can it be that

you are frightened of me? I wouldn‟t hurt you, I promise, you are much too

beautiful for that.‟

„No, not fear, anger,‟ flashed Tanya, then bit her tongue, as she saw

his eyebrows go up haughtily, then he smiled, a look of interest coming into

his bored, rather cynical face. „So, the kitten has claws, eh? And what have I

done to make you angry, my dove? Pray tell me, and I will amend it.‟

„Well, if you really want to know, I don‟t like being spoken to in that

rude manner,‟ replied Tanya candidly, giving him back look for look. Again he

looked surprised and also rather amused. „And in what manner do you think I

should speak to a serving wench?‟ he enquired sarcastically. „Pray enter,



Tanya

71

madam, and deposit the tray here, and be so kind as to pour for your humble

servant?‟ He gave a crack of laughter, and Tanya‟s temper rose again.

„I may be a . . . a serving wench, as you call it, by circumstance, but

most certainly not by birth,‟ she cried furiously. „My father was of noble birth,

and my mother of good Swedish stock.‟

„But not, I take it, joined together in the sight of – er – God?‟ he

murmured, still looking at her mockingly. For a moment, Tanya didn‟t

understand what he meant, then, as the meaning dawned on her, she gave a

gasp, and a flush spread over her face, her rage boiling over.

„How dare you?‟ she shouted. „How dare you cast a slur on my

parents! Of course, they were married. My father died before I was born, and

my mother and sister, a ll the family I had, were murdered by your filthy

countrymen, the scum. Do you hear me? You‟re all scum, every one of you. I

wouldn‟t let you touch me if you were the last man on earth. I hate you, hate

you.‟ Her breath broke on a sob, and she would have run from the room if he

hadn‟t reached out a hand and grabbed her fiercely by the arm. He pulled

her close against his chest so that her huge, tear-drenched eyes stared

defiantly up into his face. Quite unable to move, Tanya could only struggle

silently, annoyed with herself for losing her temper when she had decided to

stay coldly aloof and unobtrusive.

„If anyone else had spoken to me so, I would have their tongue cut

out,‟ he said softly, and from the set of his mouth, she knew he spoke the

truth. For the first time since her outburst, she realised the enormity of what

she had done. Nevertheless, she continued to stare back at him, unflinching.

„However, as it is you, my dear, I must think of a more fitting – er –

punishment.‟ His arm tightened around her, then he bent his head and kissed



Tanya

72

her, not lovingly at all, but brutally, until she felt a trickle of blood run down

her chin, caused by the cruel pressure of his teeth against her lips. How long

that kiss went on, she did not know, it seemed like a lifetime. When at last

the pressure ceased, she saw that his eyes were dark with desire, and he

was looking at her in a way that made her shiver involuntarily. His hand crept

up from her waist and took possession of her breast, and he began to force

her backwards to the bed.

„No, no,‟ she moaned, turning her head this way and that to escape his

searching mouth. „No, you can‟t, you can‟t, I won‟t let you. Not now, my lord,

not now.‟

But it was no use, he was taking no notice of her at all. He wanted her,

wanted her now, and nothing she could say would stop him. She gave a little

sob and, even as she felt the bed at the back of her knees, felt herself falling

into its softness; she became aware that someone was knocking insistently

on the door. It seemed to penetrate into the Prince‟s brain finally, and with a

muttered curse, he flung her from him and turned on his heel to answer the

door. Through the mist that was threatening to encompass her, Tanya could

hear voices raised in some sort of disagreement, then finally the door

slammed shut. She shrank back as Mensherikovsky advanced towards her,

then she saw that he was scowling.

„Of all the cursed times that king of yours could choose, he must need

to send for me now, immediately, to discuss my business here,‟ he snarled,

and his eyes lingered on Tanya‟s long, slender legs, which had become

uncovered during the struggle. „I‟ve half a mind to tell him to go to the devil,‟

he mused, then, seeing her flinch and hastily cover herself, he laughed.



Tanya

73

„Oh, never fear, my lovely, duty must come first, as always. I must

leave now, my servants are already packing for me, and I want to take my

time over you. Will you come with me?‟ This last was so unexpected that

Tanya stared at him for a moment in disbelief, thinking she must have

misheard him.

„Well?‟ he asked impatiently. „Will you? I can offer you a much better

life than you can enjoy here, I assure you. You will command every luxury,

travel wherever it pleases you – it must be preferable to the life you lead

here.‟

‘No,’ she spat at him furiously. „I would rather be the lowest kitchen slut

than go with you. At least, I should still have my self-respect. I wouldn‟t go

with you if you offered me the world on a plate. Nothing will induce me,

nothing.‟ She leapt to her feet and tried to make for the door, angry tears

running down her face. He barred the way, and she saw he was very angry

himself, but the other look was still there, and he was smiling, which

somehow made it worse.

„So, sweet Tanya, my little puritan, we shall see. I shall say au revoir

for now, but not for long, I assure you.‟

„I never want to see you again, so it may as well be goodbye,‟ she

snapped, then dodging round him, ran from the room. She didn‟t stop until

she reached her room, then threw herself on the bed, sobbing

uncontrollably now. Her mouth felt bruised and sore, and she went to look

in the mirror. Cracked and scored though it was, she could still see how

awful she looked, with her hair tumbling down and her mouth all swollen.

She bathed her face in icy co ld water and did her hair tightly back in a

severe bun, subconsciously trying to make herself look less attractive. She



Tanya

74

sighed, almost wishing she was plain and uninteresting like Olga, for it

would make life much more uncomplicated. She realised suddenly that all

the things she had been dreaming of getting one day – wealth, fine clothes

– anything hers to command he had said – she had just turned down

without thinking twice about it.

„I still want all of those things,‟ she muttered to herself. „But not that

way. I‟m not going to sell myself to someone hateful like that, just to get rich.

I‟ll do it alone, or not at all.‟ But even to her own ears, this sounded

impossible, for she knew that unless some miracle occurred, there was no

other way. So she told herself with a heavy heart, she would wait for the

miracle.

Luckily, no one took much notice of her that morning, for everyone was

dashing about here and there, trying to get Prince Mensherikovsky away as

quickly as possible so that he would not be late for his meeting with the king,

who was with a hunting party on a large estate nearby. Only when the party

had left, and all was unnaturally quiet after the departure of the distinguished

guest, did Dame Katya look shrewdly at Tanya and ask her if she was ill. On

her disclaiming, she looked hard at her, then sent her off to the town to get

some shopping for her.

„And don‟t hurry, take your time, there‟s little to do now for a while,‟ she

added kindly, casting a knowing eye at the girl‟s swollen eyes and mouth.

Tanya took her at her word, and it was getting dusk when she returned

to the i nn. Dame Katya sent her straight upstairs to her room, advising her to

get some sleep, for she looked as if she needed it. Wisely, the good lady

refrained from questioning Tanya, which was just as well, for the girl was at

the end of her tether. She noticed with relief that Mathilda was not in the



Tanya

75

room, and she flung herself down on the bed, falling into a dreamless sleep

as soon as her head touched the pillow.

She was awake early the next day, and Olga and Sonja were still

snoring peacefully, but of Mathilda , there was no sign, and her bed had not

been slept in. Tanya shrugged her shoulders and waking the two other girls,

asked them if they knew where she was.

„No, I‟ve no idea,‟ said Sonja, knuckling her eyes and yawning. „I‟m not

her keeper. Come to that, neither are you. Perhaps she‟s already up.‟

The three girls dressed in silence, and Tanya followed the others

downstairs, a great feeling of relief flooding over her when she thought that

the hateful Prince was gone, and she need never see him again. Of the

threats he had uttered before he left, she took no note, for they had been

said in the heat of the moment, and it was hardly likely he would come back

this way again, his mission surely being to get back to Tsar Peter as quickly

as possible with the outcome of his meeting with the king.

„And even if he does, I should never go with him, never!‟ she thought

vehemently.

Tanya quickly slipped back into her old routine until the days of the

Prince‟s visit seemed little more than a dream. Mathilda seemed to have

completely disappeared, and privately, Tanya was sure she had somehow

persuaded the Prince to take her with him, for she had left the same day as

he, and she had more or less admitted to Tanya that that was what she

hoped to do. Dame Katya shrugged her shoulders philosophically and said

that she had always known the girl would come to a bad end. No one as yet

had been employed to replace her, and with her departure, Olga and Sonja



Tanya

76

became easier to live with, obviously taking Tanya as their ideal now, and ,

following her lead, became quite pleasant room-mates.

The busy days sped by, and soon two weeks had passed. Tanya

thought Mensherikovsky should be back in his native Russia by now and

unconsciously relaxed. She still spent much of her time avoiding unwanted

attentions, for wherever she went, there always seemed to be men following

her around, like bees around a honey pot, as Dame Katya put it, rather

sharply.

One evening, Tanya, tired and aching from an unusually busy day of

running up and down the stairs, fetching and carrying for guests, was lying

on her bed, reading a book she had borrowed from Pieter. The landlord was

hardly able to read himself and had been most impressed when he learnt

that Tanya was most proficient at this art! It was a real luxury to her, and she

was deeply engrossed in the book, although the subject itself, the history of

Sweden, she was familiar with. Olga was sitting listening, her eyes round in

her plain little face. „Oh, I wish you would read aloud more often, Tanya,‟ she

gasped wonderingly. „I‟ve never heard the like, not ever. What happened

then, after that nasty man was murdered?‟

Tanya sighed and carried on reading patiently. She didn‟t really enjoy

these sessions, for Olga was not very bright and was constantly asking for

some word or phrase to be explained and subsequently made the tale rather

broken. Just at that moment, Sonja burst into the room excitedly. She had

been taking her turn to serve in the taproom, and her round face was rather

flushed with ale.

„Oh, Tanya, you‟ll never guess what!‟ she exclaimed and stood there,

obviously bursting with news.



Tanya

77

„No, I don‟t expect I can guess, Sonja, what is it?‟ asked Tanya quietly.

„I‟ve a message for you – from Mathilda, of all people!‟ cried Sonja.

„She wants you to meet her downstairs in the yard – she says she has some

great news for you, but that she needs your help before she can tell you what

it is.‟

„Mathilda?‟ ejaculated Tanya in surprise. „Whatever can Mathilda want

to see me for? I don‟t believe it, she hates me, you know that. Whatever

news she may have can be of no interest to me. If she wishes for my help,

she can come up here and see me.‟

„She doesn‟t dare come up, not after her running off like that, she‟s

frightened Dame Katya will catch her, I expect,‟ explained Sonja impatiently.

„She said she‟s sorry for what she said in the past, and please, please will

you go?‟

Tanya gave an impatient sigh and closed the book reluctantly. She

could really think of no reason for Mathilda to wish to see her and was

indeed rather suspicious, thinking that perhaps the girl wanted to berate her

or harm her in some way, but she shook off this feeling, for really there was

nothing whatsoever she could do to her.

„All right then, Sonja, tell her I‟ll be down in a moment,‟ she said quietly,

then, after brushing her hair out and straightening her crumpled dress, for

she did not wish to appear at a disadvantage, she went downstairs into the

taproom.

„Well, where is Mathilda?‟ she asked, looking around, for there was no

sign of the girl.

„Didn‟t I tell you, she won‟t come in, she‟s out in the yard,‟ cried Sonja and ran

off to serve an impatient customer.



Tanya

78

Tanya went out of the taproom door and peered uncertainly through the

darkness. She could just make out a shadowy figure over by the stables, and she

crossed the muddy yard carefully, holding her dress up to save it getting soiled. So

intent was she on this that it wasn‟t until she was nearly on top of the figure that she

realised it was a man, not a woman, and some prompting feeling made her

instinctively turn to run, sure that in some way she had been tricked. Before she

could move, however, she found herself gripped hard, and a cloak or some such

garment was flung over her head and held tight. She tried to scream, but the stifling

folds of the cloth were across her mouth and hardly a sound came out, then she was

lifted right off her feet and slung over the man‟s shoulder. She felt herself being

carried out of the yard and tried desperately to struggle free but could hardly move at

all. Suddenly, she was thrown roughly down and landed heavily on a hard floor. Her

head cracked against something, and a wave of unconsciousness threatened to

overcome her. Still stunned, she felt her hands being tied tightly behind her, then a

gag was tied roughly round her mouth, nearly choking her. It smelt very unsavoury

and made her retch. Most of the cloak was still over her head, half suffocating her.

She vaguely heard a door slam, then next moment, the floor began to pitch and

bump beneath her, and she was flung against some kind of obstacle. All sorts of

terrifying thoughts were chasing through her head, and she felt as if she was in some

kind of a nightmare, so unreal did it all seem. Then, as the floor gave an even greater

heave than usual, she was flung hard against something, her head again hit it

violently, and she sank into a merciful oblivion.



Tanya

79





Chapter 5


Tanya came to her senses to find herself still rocking and swaying in what she now

realised was obviously a vehicle of some sort. From the fact that she was hot, rather

than cold, she surmised she must be in a closed carriage. She was stifling and felt

very sick. She didn‟t dare to struggle, for she was terrified that she would suffocate if

the cloth was wrapped any tighter round her face. She tried to ease the discomfort of

her position, but it was quite impossible. How long she lay, bumped and shaken

around, she had no idea, for she was only half conscious and occasionaly passed

out for short periods. Fear and despair swept over her, and she would have sobbed if

she could, but she was beyond even that. Just as she felt that at any moment she

would die, in fact, almost wanted to die, the mad swaying motion eased a little, then

eventually stopped. A cold blast of air told her someone had opened the door; she

was lifted up, then roughly deposited again. She vaguely heard an exclamation, then

the cloak was pulled from her head, and her vision swam gradually into focus. She

saw carriage lamps in a huge coach of some sort, and a dark face hovering over her.

„Fools, dolts, did you have to half kill her?‟ raged a familiar voice. „I told you to

abduct her and bring her over the border, not to mistreat her. By God, I‟ve half a mind

to, . . . to, . . . go on, get out of my sight. My man will give you your money. Tanya,

can you hear me? They weren‟t supposed to hurt you, are you all right?‟

Another sickening feeling of fear took control of her. So intent on her present

suffering had she been that hardly a thought as to where she was being taken had

entered her head. She had vaguely thought that perhaps it was some kind of

revenge to do with Mathilda, but now the awful truth swept over her. She had been

abducted by Prince Mensherikovsky and was now in Russia! She raged at herself for

being such a gullible fool as to believe the Mathilda story and wondered how much



Tanya

80

Sonja had been paid for betraying her. She should have guessed that the Prince

would never give up as easily as she had thought, and now she was helpless, in his

power completely. The tears were now running down her cheeks, try as she would to

stop them. Prince Mensherikovsky was busy untying her gag and bonds.

„Water,‟ he commanded imperiously over his shoulder, and someone unseen

handed him a skin bag. He made her drink a little, then bathed her face gently. As

her vision cleared, she saw that his usualy hard features were softened into an

expression of tenderness.

„Here, drink this,‟ he commanded and poured something fiery down her throat

from the contents of another flask. She choked, but almost immediately felt better as

its warmth flowed through her, somehow giving her strength. She gave a shudder

and feebly tried to push him away, struggling to sit up. He put his arm round her

shoulders and lifted her up, then laid her down on something soft. She realised that it

was, in fact, a huge bed that took up almost all the interior of the coach. He

smoothed back her hair from her forehead, then gave another curt command to

someone outside. Almost immediately, the coach-sleigh began to move, and soon

they were speeding along. Tanya found her voice.

„Pig,‟ she said furiously and tried to sit up again. „Let me go, let me go, you

can‟t do this.‟

He smiled his old, hateful smile, and the hard look was back in his face.

„Can‟t, my dear Tanya, is not in my vocabulary,‟ he said smoothly and held out

his hand. „Come, come, my sweet, cannot you make the best of your situation? It is

one that many young females would give their right arm for. Mathilda for one. Poor

Mathilda.‟ He shook his head sadly.

„What . . . what do you mean, poor Mathilda?‟ she asked shakily, trying to stop

herself from trembling.



Tanya

81

„Why, she didn‟t like my decision to leave her behind after I tired of her,‟ he

explained silkily. „I had to have her, er, punished. She tried to stab me, you see, when

I called her what she was – a slut! Her back won‟t look so pretty again for a long, long

time. I had her whipped,‟ he finished, looking at her from under his lashes.

„Yes, that‟s just the sort of thing you would do,‟ said Tanya coldly, her lip curling

to show her distaste. She knew she was being foolish, tempting fate perhaps, but

with this man, she couldn‟t help herself. How she hated him!

His expression darkened for a moment, then he laughed.

„You will never change, will you, little Tanya? I think you‟ll hate me as long as

we live. But as long as you feel something, I don‟t care if it is love or hate. In my

experience, they are much the same thing.‟

He looked as if he would take her in his arms there and then, and she gave a

gasp and shrank back. He drew back immediately.

„No, of course, I think you have had enough for one day,‟ he agreed. „I‟ve

waited impatiently for what seems to me a very long time, and I can wait a little

longer. But only a little!‟

„I‟ll never let you touch me, I‟ll kill myself first,‟ snarled Tanya, her fingers curling

like claws. „I hate you, yes, but it has nothing whatsoever to do with love. I would

rather lie with the lowest peasant than you, my lord,‟ she finished mockingly.

„Oh, I think you will change your mind later, and I‟m not going to quarrel with

you now. Go to sleep, you will be surprised how much brighter the world will seem

when you are not so tired. No, don‟t argue and don‟t say anything. You have my

word of honour that I will not touch you – tonight at all events. So sleep sound. I am

going to ride for a while.‟ He banged on the roof and shouted an order. The coach

came to a halt, and a surprised face appeared at the window. „Get my horse,‟ rapped

out the Prince, then he opened the door and was gone.



Tanya

82

Tanya lay, her mind in a whirl for a little while; then her aching head, combined

with all the excitement and fright she had just experienced took its toll, and she sank

into a deep sleep. Once, she thought in a dream, someone came and laid a gentle

hand on her forehead, and she thought she felt a light kiss on her lips, but her sleep

was so interspersed with strange dreams that she discounted it. When she awoke, it

was bright daylight, and a weak sun filtered in through the window. What she could

see of the landscape was covered in snow, for it was well into winter now, but the sky

was a pale watery blue. She raised herself up to peer cautiously out of the window

and could make out several figures on horseback in the distance, and another sleigh

following behind the one she occupied. She turned her attention to the interior of the

coach and gazed round, wide eyed in spite of herself. The opulence of the furs, the

cloth of gold hangings, and soft feather mattress gave her a feeling of unaccustomed

luxury. There was a brazier fixed to the side of the coach, and it gave off a good heat,

making it very warm and cosy inside the bed-coach, in strong contrast to the cold,

bleak scene outside. She felt very annoyed with herself for noting these things, but

she couldn‟t help it. She noticed a hand mirror attached to a fitting above the bed and

took it down. She gave an exclamation of horror at the reflection that looked back at

her. Her face was pale, and she had a livid bruise on her temple. Her hair was

tangled and lank, and her dress was in tatters. She had lost one of her shoes, and

she felt absolutely filthy. Not that she wanted to look good for him, but she felt at a

great disadvantage. She felt more anger than fear now, but not the hot anger she

usually felt, that showed itself in a fit of temper, then passed away as quickly as it had

come. No, this was a cold, calculating anger, that this man should take matters into

his own hands, ruin her life at the snap of his fingers. She might feel safe here, in the

snugness of the carriage, but the moment he stepped through that door, all the



Tanya

83

horror would start again. She just didn‟t want to think of it, it made her afraid, and she

needed to think clearly now.

She realised suddenly that she was absolutely starving, and her sense of

humour almost got the better of her. It always made her want to laugh that in

moments of stress, she always felt hungry. Now, the fact that she hadn‟t eaten in

many hours made her feel quite faint with hunger. She felt strongly tempted to bang

on the adjoining door and ask the coachman to stop so she could get something to

eat, but the thought that that would bring the Prince in deterred her. She tried to do

something to improve her appearance, but without much success. She looked a

veritable hussy! This was what annoyed her the most, for really, that was just what

she was not. But how to get this man to believe her! Even if he did, she somehow

couldn‟t see it making much difference, but she was determined to try.

For an interminable time she sat, watching the bleak, uninteresting landscape

speed by, until she realy did feel quite faint with hunger, and was just steeling herself

to knock on the partition when the pace began to slow, and soon the great coach

came to a standstill. One of the horsemen detached himself from the group and

galloped over to the coach. The Prince dismounted and handed his horse to one of

the soldiers who ran up to him. He swung himself up into the coach and was about to

order the coachman to continue when he was surprised by a haughty voice from the

opposite corner.

„I have no wish to be of any further trouble to Your Highness, but do you think it

would be humanly possible for someone to furnish me with some form of

sustenance, or I am afraid you will be conveying a corpse to wherever our ultimate

destination may be.‟

He swung round and looked at her through narrowed eyes.



Tanya

84

„Well, well, so you‟re awake, are you? And where, may I ask, did a common

servant girl learn such a wide vocabulary?‟

„As I have been trying to tell Your Highness, since we first met, I am no such

thing,‟ replied Tanya curtly, trying hard to keep her temper and remain cool and

detached. She had decided that this would be the best way of dealing with him.

„If you could arrange for me to have something to eat, and perhaps freshen

myself up a little, I would like to converse further with Your Highness on this subject.‟

She sat composedly, her hands folded demurely in her lap, but her eyes were

watching him carefully to see what sort of effect her new approach was having. He

certainly looked surprised, if nothing else.

„Very well, my dear, I can arrange for the food. Unfortunately, I have no

washing facilities on this coach. However, in a few days, we will be visiting a nunnery,

which will be our only stop before we reach Moscow. I should imagine that you will

find everything you could wish for there.‟

So he was taking her to Moscow! She could hardly believe it. That was where

the monster Tsar Peter had his court, and where all sorts of terrible plans were

hatched for the destruction of the Tsar‟s enemies. She had heard many tales of this

fabulous city, most of which she discounted as superstitious rubbish, but she had

certainly never, in her wildest dreams, thought she would visit it, – and definitely not

in the company of a Russian Prince! Seeing that he was still regarding her rather

sardonically, obviously awaiting some sort of reaction, she inclined her head

graciously. „Thank you, Your Highness. Perhaps, if I could be provided with a comb

or some such item, I may contrive until we reach the nunnery.‟

„I shall contrive more than a comb, I think,‟ he replied gravely, stil looking at her

in that half-mocking, half-searching manner. She thought she could perhaps detect



Tanya

85

some change in his manner towards her, perhaps that he was revising his first

estimation of her character. Or was it her imagination?

He descended again from the coach and began issuing orders in his sharp

autocratic voice. She might hate him, but had to admire his manner and air. In a

surprisingly short period of time, a servant entered the coach, bearing a huge tray,

the contents of which almost made Tanya swoon, so hungry was she. She could

only suppose that Prince Mensherikovsky took his cook with him wherever he went

and that there was some sort of cooking facilities in the other coach, for the spread

on the tray looked freshly cooked and quite delicious. Although at the time Tanya

had no idea what she was eating, she could tel that it was of the finest, and never

had she tasted anything like it. As she learnt afterwards, she had consumed hot egg

pâté, cheese Blini-cakes, caviar on little squares of hot toast, sterlet fish in curdled

cream, and scented nuts and fruit to finish. There was also a generous supply of a

sweet-tasting liquid, which she drank liberally and later discovered was cherry vodka.

It certainly made her feel reckless, and somehow, with a full stomach and the heady

feeling induced by the spirit, matters seemed considerably less desperate than they

had the night before. When the tray was whisked away, the Prince, who had been

regarding her repast with amused eyes, eating sparingly himself but quaffing great

drafts of the cherry vodka, pulled out a huge trunk from underneath the bed and flung

open the lid with a flourish.

„Take your pick, fair Tanya,‟ he said with a mocking bow. „I will give you one

hour, then I will return to continue our so delightful conversation.‟

Tanya scarcely saw him go. She was staring down with wide eyes at the

contents of the trunk. Fitted into the lid was a huge mirror, and around it, clipped into

the lid, were dozens of cut glass bottles with gold lids, a gold-backed brush and

comb, and several other items which Tanya did not recognise at all. But it was mainly



Tanya

86

the inside of the trunk that held her attention. It was filled with what to Tanya‟s

bemused eyes looked like hundreds of items of sumptuous clothing. Without a

further thought for anything else, she delved inside. There were shifts, made of some

sort of soft, clinging material, which she later learnt was Paduasoy silk, and long

flowing sarafans embroidered with golden threads. There were gowns of velvet,

brocade, and taffeta, and gold and silver bracelets to keep the billowing sleeves of

the sarafans from covering the hands. If she had wanted, she could have worn the

earrings and rings that were tossed into the corner of the trunk, but she would not

take such jewels from this man. Every intimate item of ladies‟ attire filled another

section of the trunk, their varied colours dancing in front of her eyes.

With an effort, she tore herself away and brushed out her hair until it shone,

wishing she could wash it. Somehow she felt that the more beautiful and regal she

could make herself look, the more chance she would have of keeping the Prince at

arm‟s length. She braided her hair and pulled it back severely, although her finely

chiselled features only showed to greater advantage. She twisted the braids on top

of her head and fixed them into place with pins. The effect was most satisfactory,

making her look older, yet more appealing. Since there was no way of having a bath,

she stripped off all her old rags with a grimace of distaste and flung them away from

her, with a silent vow never to wear their like again, whatever should happen to her.

She cleansed herself with sweet smelling oils, then slipped on the cool, soft

undergarments with a shiver of delight and anointed herself with some of the

perfumes she found in the bottles. Then she chose a golden sarafan to wear over a

gown of emerald green brocade, knowing with unerring taste that it brought out the

delicate chestnut tones of her hair and made her skin look almost transparent in its

whiteness. The dress had been made for a larger woman, but with the aid of a few

pins, she managed to make it fit well enough. Although she couldn‟t see the full effect



Tanya

87

in the mirror, she felt sure she could do little to improve upon it. She ignored the

contents of the other jars, for she knew her skin was enough on its own, and the pots

of red and white pastes and others which she had no idea what to do with would

detract rather than add to her flawless skin. She was sure the hour must be nearly

up, so closing the lid down, sat nervously on the corner of the bed, awaiting her fate.

Ten minutes crawled by, and she was just thinking indignantly that it was typical of

him to be late when she was feeling quite sick with nervousness, when the coach

pulled up, the door opened, and he stepped in. No sooner was the door closed

behind him than it started its wild, careering pace again.

„Do you always travel this fast, Your Highness?‟ asked Tanya, more to keep him

away from her than a desire to know.

„Always,‟ he replied politely, his eyes devouring her. „My compliments, my dear. I

don‟t believe I have ever set eyes on a more beautiful woman and that you may take

as a compliment of no mean order, for I have known many. Now, can you give me

any reason why I should wait any longer? I really cannot think how or why I have

waited this long, except that circumstances have been rather against me, and, of

course, that you are so different somehow from any other woman. God, but you‟re

lovely!‟

Seeing him about to move towards her, Tanya began to talk hastily,

impetuously, thinking that anything was better than to have him take her in his arms

here and now, in this swaying coach.

„Wait, Your Highness. I believe you gave your word to listen to me first. Well,

now I will give you several reasons why you should wait. In fact, why I shall never be

your mistress, even if you do force me now, for if you do, I shall find the first

opportunity I can to kill myself, I swear it on the bones of my father and mother. The

first reason I can never be your mistress is that I could never dishonour my father‟s



Tanya

88

name. He was of noble blood and was so proud of his heritage. His name was Jean

de la Verrière, and he was the younger son of the Comte de la Verrière, a

Frenchman whose blood goes back as far as yours. He married my mother, Matilda

Svenson, the only daughter of a wealthy merchant when she was just seventeen. He

gambled all their money away and was killed in a duel. My mother was left practically

destitute, and France being beyond her means to reach, preferred to take the

chance of making her own way in Sweden to going and throwing herself on the

dubious mercy of my father‟s relations. She took us two girls to a small farm owned

by her uncle, who died soon after leaving it to us. We lived there for many years, and

we were both given the best education possible. I would probably be living there still,

were it not for . . .‟ she broke off, and her expression hardened.

„But I told you about your countrymen‟s little, er, visit, did I not? I saw it all you

see, I wasn‟t even spared that. I nearly went out of my mind, and probably would

have, had it not been for the intervention of one of the kindest, most dear men it has

ever been my fortune to meet.‟

„Oh, and this, er, kind dear man, I suppose he received none of your favours?‟

interrupted the Prince, his eyes kindling with jealousy.

„Don‟t be a fool,‟ said Tanya sharply, not caring how she spoke to him, for she

was staking everything on this plea for mercy and truly meant to kill herself at the first

opportunity, should he force her to become his mistress.

„He was almost seventy years old and a hermit. – I was still a child. He nursed

me back to health, and I lived with him in a cave in the forest until he died, then

because I knew I could not survive by myself, set off to where I knew not. I finished

up at the inn where you met me. That is the story of my life.‟ Her chin went up.

„Why I should tell you this I don‟t know, but I am still a virgin, my lord, and

intend to remain so, if I can, and I swear to you on my father‟s honour that I will fight



Tanya

89

to the last of my strength to keep you away from me. I‟d kill you, even, if I had the

chance.‟

She clasped her hands together supplicatingly, hating the role she was

enacting, but desperate enough to try anything.

„I beg of you, Your Highness, do not stain my honour, for it is all I have in the

world. I am not what you thought me, you must realise this now. Please let me go, I

will do anything if you will only show mercy now.‟

She looked at him wildly, for he had hardly moved a muscle throughout her

impassioned speech; in fact, he scarcely seemed to be listening to her. She had not

remained as calm as she had intended, but she was past caring, drained of all

emotion now. Her shoulders slumped, and her lovely head drooped despairingly.

There was a long pause, in which she dared not look at him but remained in her

dejected position, trying to hold back the tears that were threatening. At last, he

spoke.

„I believe you,‟ he said unemotionally. „It was obvious to me quite a while ago

that you were no peasant girl, but I must admit I thought you were born, as they say,

on the wrong side of the blanket. I see I was mistaken.‟

Her heart lifted, and hope surged through her. She looked at him swiftly and

saw he was regarding her strangely, almost mockingly still. „However, I am afraid I

cannot let you go. It isn‟t in me to see such a prize slip through my fingers.‟

Tanya‟s shoulders went back, and her head lifted proudly. „So be it, Your

Highness. I consider myself already dead!‟

„But wait, my dear, you haven‟t let me finish. I have, although you had no way

of knowing it, spent a great part of my life in France, being the Tsar‟s emissary on

many matters of state. I have met one who would, I should imagine, be your uncle.

He is the present Comte de la Verrière, and one fact stands out in my mind. He had



Tanya

90

flaming red hair and green eyes, an unusual colouring for a Frenchman. The

coincidence is too great, therefore I believe you. You say you are a virgin. This also I

believe, – in fact I had guessed it long ago. A man of my experience can always tell.‟

He looked amused for a moment, then his expression returned to its usual

immobility.

„You say that you intend to remain a virgin. I presume that you mean until you

marry.‟

Tanya looked at him in surprise.

„Well, of course, that‟s what I meant. However, as I have no intention, in the

near future, of . . .‟

„Pardon me, my dear, but may I continue?‟ he broke in. „It is really a rather

ridiculous situation, but believe it or not, I do think I am struggling to put into words a,

– er, – proposal of marriage. In short, my sweet Tanya, wil you do me the honour of

becoming my wife? Your lack of dowry, under the circumstances, I am willing to

overlook.‟ This last was said with a mocking bow.

Tanya thought for a moment that she had heard him wrongly, then she

realised that he really had said those words, and further that he was in earnest. Her

brain refused to function, so unexpected was it. Nothing had been further from her

mind when she had told him of her history. The idea had simply never entered her

head. Apart from the fact that she would never have believed he could ever ask her

to marry him, she didn‟t want to. In the back of her mind had always been the

thought that one day she would meet a charming young man who would sweep her

off her feet and marry her in a truly romantic style; then they would live together

quietly for the rest of their days, having children, happy just to be together. The idea

that she might have to marry to save her virtue and to a man that she hated was

quite alien to her. And yet . . . what else could she do? Her heart sank. Yes, truly,



Tanya

91

what other course of action was open to her? She couldn‟t run away, not out here in

the middle of this wild and barren country where one could hear the wolves howling

outside every night and see their lean, dark forms slinking by through the trees. She

wouldn‟t live for long out there, and she most certainly didn‟t want to die! True, she

would unhesitatingly have taken her own life, even though she knew it was a grave

sin, to save her honour, but she was not desperate enough to prefer death to

marriage with a rich Russian prince who could offer her many of the things she had

for so long dreamed of. Although she hated him, perhaps she could learn to at least

tolerate him. Her skin shuddered at the thought, but what else could she do? Never

had she thought to find herself in such a dilemma. A suave voice broke into her

reverie.

„I understand that your breath has been quite taken away, little Tanya, but do

you think you could find it in yourself to give me an answer? You are the first, and I‟m

quite sure the last to receive such an offer from me, and I have much to offer. A few

hearts in Moscow will no doubt be broken too.‟

„Not wishing to appear vain,‟ agreed Tanya cordially, unable to help herself.

He threw back his head and gave a shout of laughter. „God, but life will never

be boring with you, at al events. Well, your answer?‟ His voice was sharper now,

more insistent.

„I . . . I must have time to think. You can‟t expect me to . . . surely there is

plenty of time,‟ stammered Tanya, feeling like a trapped animal must feel as the

snare closes around it.

„No, not plenty at all. About, let me see, a week now, I believe.‟

„What do you mean?‟ asked Tanya in bewilderment.



Tanya

92

„We are making a small detour as I have business at the Pokrovsky

Monastery at Suzdal, and I mean to marry you there. I know a priest who will be quite

delighted to perform the ceremony, and what more fitting place?‟

„Oh, I must have more time,‟ cried Tanya wildly. „My brain is in a whirl. And let

us be honest, Your Highness, you do me the honour of asking for my hand in

marriage, but truthfully, what alternative do I have? None, as far as I can see. You

ask for my answer, but it can only be yes, am I not right?‟

„How well you know me already,‟ he replied smoothly and crossed the

carriage to sit at her side. He took her hand in his, and bending his head, kissed it

lightly.

„I shall take that as your answer and shall await with impatience, our arrival,

when you will make me the happiest . . . yes, the happiest of men.‟

His eyes ran over her, and he made a movement as though to embrace her,

but when she shrank back with a shudder, he controlled himself.

„By God, I wonder if I am a bigger fool than I thought,‟ he murmured, almost to

himself, then, with one last look at her averted face, he rose to his feet.

„I shall leave you now, madam, for the present. I am afraid you will have to

endure my company for some hours each day, the rest of the time I shall ride.‟ With a

mocking bow, he knocked on the partition and, as soon as the coach had stopped,

was gone.

Tanya sat frozen, whilst the shadows lengthened and the runners swished

over the hard-packed snow, covering mile after mile. She was still sitting there when

the interior of the coach had become quite dark, and with a little shudder, she forced

herself to stand up and light the lanterns. Then she lay down on the bed, as she was,

and tried to sleep. However, she found it almost impossible and was still wide awake

a few hours later as the cold, grey dawn lit the coach, dimming the lanterns. She sat



Tanya

93

there numbly, holding on to a strap to stop herself from being flung around, for the

coach was going even faster than before. She had no doubts as to why! She looked

listlessly out of the window, eyes drawn despite herself to the dark silhouette of man

and horse etched against the snow. She had to admit to being more than a little

surprised at the forbearance the Prince was showing in leaving her alone and could

only hope it was a good omen for the future.

The next week passed al too quickly, although the monotony of the days

almost drove Tanya to wish they would arrive at their destination. Whenever they

stopped at a posting house to change the tired, steaming horses, two stalwart

servants of the Prince stood at the doors of the coach, their blank, Slavic features

expressionless, and she was never allowed to leave its confines. She saw little of the

Prince although he would spend a few hours each night sitting and talking with her,

of Moscow and life in that city, or merely leaning back in the corner, observing her

through narrowed eyes.

Day after day they sped through the bleak snowy wastes, the coach becoming

a little world of its own, providing a security that Tanya knew was all too precarious.

Late one evening, she noticed that the snowstorm was easing a little at last,

the flakes drifting down rather than driving. Soon after, through the deepening gloom,

she saw lights flickering, and buildings came into view. They were passing through a

sizeable town which, with a sinking heart, she was sure must be Suzdal. Then she

saw the high grey bastioned walls of a building looming up like a huge cliff, and her

heart gave a lurch. She sat forward and peered out intently. The place looked more

like a fortress than a holy place, and she was just thinking with relief that this could

not be the convent, when the coach came to a halt before a great iron-studded gate.

Tanya sat numbly, taking hardly any notice of the scurrying of feet and shouting of

voices taking place outside. Then the door was pulled open.



Tanya

94

„We have arrived, madam,‟ said a strange voice. „His Highness, Prince

Mensherikovsky would be pleased if you will alight now and join him inside the

convent walls.‟

Tanya took the thick fur-lined cloak he held out to her and wrapped it tightly

around her, for the air swirling into the coach was icy and, without a word, stepped

down from the coach and followed the soldier through the great gates and into a

courtyard, where a group of nuns were conversing with the Prince.

„Ah, Tanya.‟ He came to her side and raised her hand to his lips.

„You enjoyed your journey I trust?‟ His voice was mocking, and Tanya‟s palm

itched to slap his face.

„Tolerably well, in the circumstances, I thank Your Highness,‟ she replied in a

cold voice. Behind her, she heard the great gates slam shut, and the bolts drive

home. She thought that it sounded like the gates of a prison closing and shivered.

„But you are cold,‟ he said in a voice of concern. „How thoughtless of us to

keep you standing out here. Come, come, there is food and a good fire awaiting you

inside.‟

Tanya followed him numbly, feeling unreal and detached. They came into a

large refectory hall, where a generous fire was burning in the grate, and three heavy

tables were covered with such rich and varied fare that Tanya raised her brows, for it

seemed too sumptuous for a nunnery.

A tall nun detached herself from the group chattering together in a corner and

came forward.

„I am Sister Kaptelina,‟ she said in a low voice, her rather small eyes darting

backwards and forwards between the Prince and Tanya. „I expect you would like to

freshen up before partaking of our humble fare.‟



Tanya

95

She indicated the spread on the table with a deprecating gesture, then walked

back to the group. She handed out orders in a calm, authoritative voice, and a small

nun scurried forward, bobbing nervously before Tanya.

„Please follow me, noble lady,‟ she twittered, and almost ran out of the door,

casting a look over her shoulder to see if Tanya was following. She shrugged her

shoulders and dropped a small curtsey to Prince Mensherikovsky.

„With your leave, Your Highness,‟ she murmured, then folowed the nun out of the

room.

She was led along a long corridor and up two flights of stairs. She found

herself almost running to keep up with the little nun and slowed her pace a little so

that the nun had to wait for her. Eventually, she was ushered into a large chamber

with silk curtains hanging round a huge four-poster bed that dominated the room and

walls covered in rich velvet and silk hangings. The whole effect was of overpowering

opulence and seemed strangely out of place in a convent.

„You were not expected, madam, so I trust all will be in order,‟ murmured the

little nun quickly, her eyes still dropping away nervously every time Tanya looked at

her. She wondered what the little nun was frightened of.

„It is really quite lovely, more than I expected,‟ she answered graciously. „What

I should like above all things is a bath. Do you think this could be arranged?‟

„Oh yes, madam, the hot water is already on its way up, and there is a hip bath

in the closet.‟ She pulled aside an embroidered curtain, and Tanya gasped in

surprise. The closet looked more that of a fashionable lady than a nun! There were

the usual cut glass bottles and mirrors, and clothes hanging on a rail – beautiful

dresses in what, even to Tanya‟s inexperienced eyes, looked very much like the

latest fashions. The nun‟s eyes shifted away when Tanya‟s startled look turned on

her and, without any explanation, began to bustle about, pulling out the big hip bath,



Tanya

96

and setting out many of the bottles and lotions. Soon the water arrived, the bath was

filed, and a screen arranged to exclude draughts, and Tanya, feeling just a little shy

in front of the nun‟s curious gaze, slipped off her clothes and, with a deep sigh, sank

down into the water.

„How I‟ve longed for this!‟ she murmured contentedly and would have been

happy to stay there a long time, in front of the blazing fire, but was bustled along, as

the company downstairs was waiting for her before dining.

She anointed herself with the sweet-smelling perfumes proffered to her and

chose a dress of amber silk made high to the throat, which became her admirably.

She arranged her hair as best she could, simply but effectively. She shook her head

when the nun tried to offer her rouge and the black cosmetic without which, she

assured her, no lady of fashion would be seen. When Tanya, in all innocence, asked

her what she should do with it, the little woman gave a titter of laughter.

„Why, it‟s for your teeth, madam. You‟re surely not going to go down with . . .

with white teeth?‟ She gave a shudder of distaste.

„I most certainly am,‟ replied Tanya firmly. „I have no intention of using any of

these artifices. I do not consider that I need to paint my face. What sort of a place is

this anyway, where nuns have all these worldly things, isn‟t it a bit strange?‟

The little nun‟s face closed secretively, and she turned her shoulder without

answering. „Come,‟ was all she would say, so with a shrug, Tanya followed her back

down to the refectory.

The Prince came forward immediately, his eyes running over Tanya

approvingly.

„Ah, Tanya. Charming, quite charming.‟ He smiled his mocking smile and

kissed the hand she extended to him.



Tanya

97

„I have just been explaining to Sister Kaptelina that we are to be married in the

morning,‟ he said suavely. „She has assured us that Father Stevanov will be

delighted to perform the ceremony for us, so we wil have to, er, contain ourselves no

longer.‟

Tanya, much to her fury and chagrin found herself blushing and said nothing.

Sister Kaptelina gave a superior smile and seemed to be amused by what he had

said.

„Yes, indeed. He wil be present in a moment, so you will be able to meet him

first.‟

„Would you care for a drink, my sweet?‟ enquired the Prince, indicating what

seemed to Tanya a huge array of bottles. „A vodka perhaps?‟

„Thank you,‟ she replied, thinking that perhaps it would steady her nerves. She

felt quite proud that her hand did not shake when she took the glass and vowed

silently to herself that she would not blush again no matter what he said.

Just at that moment, a cold draught of air swirled around them for a moment

as the large doors at the other end of the hall were opened, heralding the arrival of a

tall, gaunt-looking man dressed in the long black robes of a monk. Maybe it was the

sudden chill, but Tanya felt the hairs on the back of her neck rising, and she felt an

unreasonable fear. The man‟s face was shadowed by a black cowl, and he looked

somehow sinister and evil, a feeling which Tanya tried hard to shake off, for how

could a priest of God be evil? He came forward, seeming somehow to float over the

floor. Despite herself, Tanya could feel prickles running up and down her back, and

she involuntarily took a backward step. Prince Mensherikovsky looked down at her

and raised his eyebrows in a silent question. She clenched her hands until the nails

dug into her palms, and the pain somehow made her feel better. The priest,



Tanya

98

meanwhile, was bowing before her. His voice, when he spoke was deep and,

surprisingly, loud. She could stil see very little of his face.

„Bless you, my daughter. So you are to marry my old friend Erik. I am sure you

will be very, very happy.‟ He seemed to end the statement on a question, and Tanya

somehow felt it was a bad omen. To be married at all to the Prince was far from her

wishes, she rebelled at the thought, yet somehow, to be married by this faceless

priest seemed to make it even worse.

The Prince broke the awkward silence.

„Shall we eat?‟ he asked smoothly and led the way to the table. Tanya sat

silent throughout the meal, toying with the rich dishes set in front of her, her usually

good appetite gone completely. The appearance of the priest had made an already

intolerable situation into something approaching a nightmare. When the priest had

sat down at the table, he put back the cowl in order to eat. Tanya had been hard put

not to give a cry of horror, for the face was dreadful to behold. His right eye had a

terrible squint, so that one could never tell where he was looking, and the left eye had

no eyeball at all, just a blank white, which was somehow worse than ever. His gaunt

face reminded Tanya of a skull, and she tried to keep her eyes away from him, but

he was like a magnet, drawing her back again and again. After what seemed to be

an interminable meal, Tanya begged to be excused, wishing only to be alone.

„Yes, yes, by all means go to bed,‟ the Prince said graciously. „My old friends

here and I have much to discuss. I shall, I believe, not see you before the ceremony,

my dear. I understand it is deemed unlucky for the groom to see the bride on their

wedding day.‟ He gave a little chuckle, as if something had amused him. „Goodnight,

my love. Sleep well.‟

Tanya dropped him a curtsey, included the rest of the company in a murmured

goodnight, and almost fled from the room. The sound of laughter, male and female



Tanya

99

followed her all the way up the stairs. Tanya was sure that it was at her they were

laughing.

She managed to find her chamber without too much trouble and felt an

unreasoning relief to see that there were two comfortingly solid bolts which she

promptly drew across the door. She undressed quickly and found a silk nightgown in

the closet. She found it very luxurious to be able to get dressed especialy for bed.

She flitted restlessly around the room, for truth to tell, she was not in the least tired,

she had just felt the need to get away from the stifling atmosphere and staring faces

downstairs. She wandered back into the closet, idly inspecting the clothes hanging

there. They all looked to be new and were made for a tal lady – the dress Tanya had

worn that evening had been far too long for her. The cosmetics were also in use, and

had she not been in a convent, Tanya would have had the idea that some lady of

fashion had hurriedly vacated the chamber in order that she could move in. She

pulled open the lid to a huge trunk which was pushed back into an unobtrusive

corner and was surprised to find that it was filled with nuns‟ habits, all green with

mould. She frowned in puzzlement. This was certainly not her idea of a convent! Still,

it was none of her business. She went back to the big bed and reluctantly climbed

inside. She wondered to herself, with a strange sinking feeling in the pit of her

stomach, what would be happening to her this time tomorrow night. She shrugged

off such thoughts, for she knew they would only make her feel morbid and miserable

and gave a sigh. Sometimes she felt as if she was in the grip of a whirlpool, being

ruthlessly flung this way and that, powerless to prevent herself from being sucked

down into . . . what? Perhaps she was a fool to be marrying the Prince, yet the streak

of common sense which she had always possessed told her that it was the only

thing she could do – there was only one other final alternative, and it was the one she

was not prepared to take. She could certainly not run away, and even if she did



Tanya

100

manage to escape, where could she run? She would never be able to get back to

the Cock Inn and was not even certain that she wanted to. The thought that to be a

Princess, with riches and position was far, far preferable to the existence she had led

up to now could not help but intrude, and if she held her husband in dislike – well,

perhaps he would soon grow tired of her and leave her to her own devices. This

seemed to happen to a lot of the females who flitted through the pages of the books

Tanya had read avidly whenever she had the chance, and they always emerged

unscathed and happy, so why not herself? On this optimistic, yet only half-believed

thought, she lay down on the bed and closed her eyes, but try as she might, she

could not sleep. She dozed off a couple of times, but her jumbled thoughts were

making her half-waking moments full of nightmarish faces, foremost that of the priest,

interspersed with the Prince‟s, mockingly satirical, and the tall nun, Sister Kaptelina.

She seemed to be standing in the centre of a huge room, filled with the shadowy

figures of nuns, all with cowls over their faces like that the priest had worn. He,

together with Prince Mensherikovsky and Sister Kaptelina were in a circle around

her, jabbering away at her in what sounded like some strange foreign tongue. She

tried to run away, but whichever way she turned, the priest‟s ghastly face rose up in

front of her. She gave a scream of pure fear and sat up in bed, shaking and bathed

in sweat. She got out of bed, frightened to stay there in case she should sleep again

and dream. How she wished she had a book to read – some calm, comfortable story

to allay her fears and soothe her into sleep. On an impulse, she slipped on the

beautiful foaming lace wrap that matched her nightgown, deciding to try to find the

library, for surely there must be one in a convent this size, and even if they were

mostly dull reading, she was sure there must be a Bible there and knew it was what

she needed to steady her nerves. With her hair flowing down around her shoulders,

she took her lamp and slid back the bolts as quietly as she could. She peered



Tanya

101

fearfully round the door, but the corridor was quite quiet, and feeling a little foolish,

she stepped out boldly, closing her door behind her. She hesitated, unsure which

direction to take, then set off towards the refectory hall, that being the only way she

knew, and she certainly did not wish to lose herself in the huge rambling building. For

the first time, she wondered how late it was, for she had little idea of how long she

had lain in a half-comatose state. The moon was sailing high in the sky, casting its

pure silvery light through the slit windows, making the shadows look inky black.

Tanya had never felt more like turning around and fleeing back to the comparative

safety of her room, but a streak of obstinacy made her go on. She descended the

two flights of stairs without meeting a soul and passed into the hall. The huge room

was quite empty, and the fire had burnt down to a few glowing embers. Obviously it

was later than she had thought. She would have to go back to her room and try to

sleep without the solace of a book. She was just turning to go when she heard a

distant murmur of voices, coming from the archway to the left of her. She hesitated

only a moment, then trod purposefully towards the sound. She passed through the

archway and found herself in another long, interminable corridor. The sound of

voices was clearer now and seemed to be emanating from behind a velvet curtain

which hung over an opening to the right of her. She tiptoed forward, determined to

see who was speaking before revealing herself and stood close to the curtain,

listening. Quite clearly now, she heard the Prince‟s voice.

„But Your Majesty, I can assure you that this is not so. You have many, many

followers who would dearly like to see the tyrant overthrown, and Prince Alexis on

the throne, under the firm, guiding hand of his mother. The Tsar is bleeding our

beloved country dry with his accursed wars, and his westernisation schemes. Surely

what was good enough for our forefathers should be good enough for us.‟



Tanya

102

„True, my dear Erik, very true,‟ replied a cold, haughty voice which was

unknown to Tanya. „And yet, how long must I wait – shut up in this cursed place.

True, I have my amusements, but I want power! I wasn‟t made to be a nun. They

cannot force me to take the veil, I am the Tsaritsa! And one day my son will rule, and

the tyrant wil be ground under my heel.‟

The voice finished on a fanatical note, and knowing herself to be

eavesdropping, knowing she should tiptoe away again, Tanya was unable to help

risking a peep through the curtains. Her astonished gaze took in the large room with

its elaborate hangings of cloth of gold, and rich velvets, the huge chair that occupied

the centre of the room, and the portrait hanging behind it, depicting a woman and

boy, seated on a throne. But her main attention was on the occupants of the room.

Seated in the chair was a thin, tall woman, middle-aged, with a sallow face and dark

hair arranged in an elaborate coiffure. She was dressed in a rich, fashionable gown

of deep red, cut very low across her scraggy bosom, and her face was so thick with

paint it looked like a grotesque mask. Her thin lips were drawn back to reveal teeth

cosmetically blackened in the style of Russian ladies of fashion. Tanya‟s eyebrows

raised in surprise as she saw that the other two women in the room were Sister

Kaptelina and the little nun who had showed her to her room earlier. The younger

woman was also dressed in bright, fashionable clothes, only the tall, stately sister

being still attired in her nun‟s habit. Facing the three women was Mensherikovsky,

sprawled back in his chair, his face flushed with wine. The women also looked as

though they had been partaking freely, and the little nun was decidedly unsteady as

she crossed the room.

„Well, I think it a great pity that the Streltsy Guard are away for two whole

weeks,‟ she whined in a complaining voice. „It‟s so dull with no men about the place.‟



Tanya

103

„Perhaps it is just as wel in the circumstances,‟ the Prince answered dryly. „I

should have quite a job explaining them away to my little bride.‟

„That‟s another thing, Mensherikovsky,‟ cried the occupant of the chair.

„Whatever has come over you, succumbing to such an insipid little fool? You‟ll be

tired of this Tanya within a week.‟

„Maybe,‟ replied the Prince dismissingly. „We shall see.‟

At the mention of her name, Tanya gave a guilty start, suddenly realising

where she was, and what she was doing. She backed away from the room, then

gave a choked cry. A hand had fallen on her shoulder, gripping it cruelly, and forcing

her round. She found herself face to face with Father Stevanov‟s formidable

countenance and gave another scream, for she could not bear the touch of his cold

clammy hand on her skin. The curtain behind her was flung aside, and she saw

Mensherikovsky emerge. Never had she thought she would be so glad to see him.

With a gasp, she wrenched herself away from the priest‟s hold and ran to him,

shaking uncontrollably. He did not touch her, however, merely looked at her

frowningly for a moment.

„What is happening here?‟ he enquired in a level voice.

„I found this woman spying,‟ declared the priest in his deep compelling voice.

„She had her ear to the curtain, listening to your conversation.‟

„Is this true, Tanya?‟ asked Mensherikovsky in a cold voice that chilled Tanya

to the bone. His voice was usually so warm when he spoke to her. „Can it be that I

have been mistaken in you, that you have tried to make a fool of me? Answer me!‟

„No, no, it‟s not true,‟ gasped Tanya, her hands going out imploringly to him, for

instinct told her that she could be in very serious trouble if he did not believe her.

„At . . . at least, it‟s true I was listening, but I had no idea what you were talking

about. I couldn‟t sleep and came down to ask if someone had a book they would



Tanya

104

lend me to help calm my nerves. I‟ve had a trying time lately, and I had such a terrible

dream.‟ Her voice broke and tears started to her eyes, for it was the truth, and if he

deserted her, she knew she was lost. To her relief, his countenance relaxed a little,

and he pulled aside the curtain.

„I think perhaps we will be more comfortable if we continue our conversation in

here. This corridor is extremely chilly, you are shivering, my dear.‟ He stood aside,

and Tanya trod nervously into the room. The priest hesitated a moment, then, with a

shrug of his bony shoulders, followed her. Mensherikovsky pulled back the curtain

and poured Tanya a glass of wine.

„Here, drink this, it will warm you,‟ he ordered brusquely, and his keen eyes

swept the assembled company with a swift hard look. He seemed to come to a

decision.

„I think it will be best if you allow me to give Tanya a brief outline of what is

happening here,‟ he declared, then held up his hand to check the storm of protest

that started.

„Wait,‟ he said peremptorily. „Let me ask Tanya a question first.‟ He turned

to face her, then rapped out. „Tanya, if you found yourself alone, with the Tsar,

what would you feel like doing?‟

Almost without thinking, Tanya replied, „I should feel like killing him, if I had

the chance.‟

He smiled broadly. „Excellent. Does that answer your questions?‟

„No,‟ replied the priest bluntly. „She said that too readily. Perhaps she has

been trained to say that.‟

„Tell us why you would wish to kill him,‟ continued the Prince, ignoring Father

Stevanov. Tanya told them, quietly, clearly, what had happened to her family,



Tanya

105

watching their faces for reaction. All but Father Stevanov seemed inclined to believe

her, and he, she was sure, would somehow always be her enemy.

„Well, well, perhaps it is so,‟ cried the Tsaritsa impatiently. „But do we need to

tell her anything?‟

„Not much, Your Majesty, but just enough to still her curiosity. I do not think we

need fear that she will betray us, and anyway, tomorrow she will be my wife, and my

fortune will be her fortune. She would scarcely wish to be branded the wife of a

traitor.‟

„Come, come, Prince,‟ cried Sister Kaptelina indignantly. „Hardly a traitor. You

and I know that Russia is now under a usurper. The tyrant‟s followers are the traitors.‟

„Yes, yes,‟ he replied quickly. „But if our plans were to become known before

we are ready, then we should be the traitors, isn‟t that so?‟

She looked unconvinced, and he looked around the company again. „Well, are

we agreed? She only needs to know the absolute minimum.‟

„Very well,‟ agreed the Tsaritsa, and the others nodded reluctantly too, only

Father Stevanov, scowling dreadfully, hunched a shoulder and turned away.

„Be it on your own heads,‟ he muttered in a surly voice, then said no more.

Mensherikovsky turned to Tanya, frowning.

„Well, Tanya,‟ he began. „As you will have realised, you are honoured to be in

the presence of the Tsaritsa of all the Russias, the Tsaritsa Eudoxia. Tsar Peter has

put her aside, forced her to enter this convent, where eventually she will have to take

the veil, and thus be divorced from the Tsar. He will then be free to carry on his lewd

and vicious life without the restraining hand of goodness and charity.‟ He bowed

towards the Tsaritsa, although Tanya was sure that the mocking gleam was in his

eye and that he didn‟t mean a word of it.



Tanya

106

„We believe that Russia – and indeed ourselves, will be better off under the

gracious influence of the Tsaritsa and her son Alexis, whom the Tsar has torn from

his mother‟s arms and sent to live with his sister Natalya, at Preobrazhenskoe. Alexis

hates Peter, as very few do, and would do anything to overthrow him and ascend the

throne. It is to that end that we all strive. You need only know that one day, God

willing, it will all come to fruition, and when that day dawns, Russia, and perhaps the

world, will thank us for our humble efforts.‟

He finished dramatically and flung his arm back to indicate the portrait behind

them. Now Tanya could see that it was Eudoxia who was depicted, together with a

thin, unprepossessing boy who could only be her son, Prince Alexis. He held in his

hand a sceptre and orb, and a royal crown was on his head. Underneath ran the

inscription „The Tsar and Tsaritsa – God‟s will be done, Thy Kingdom Come.‟

Tanya thought privately that his speech had a false ring about it, for it was so

unlike his usual, dry-bored manner. But perhaps he had wanted to impress. They

were all looking at her now, obviously awaiting her reactions. „Well, if he can act, so

can I,‟ she thought cynically and clasped her hands together enthusiastically.

„But how marvellous!‟ she cried. „I think it is a wonderful thing you are doing –

so brave, so courageous. I wish you every success in your ambitions and would

never betray you, never. If ever you should require some service of me, you shall

only need to ask. In the meantime, I shall pray for your victory.‟

„Bravo,‟ cried the Tsaritsa, quite carried away by it all. „But she is charming, my

dear Erik, quite charming. And now she knows I am here, why, I shall attend the

ceremony tomorrow.‟ She nodded graciously at their protestations of delight, and

soon after, the company broke up. The Prince took Tanya‟s arm in a hard grip.

„I shall see you to your room, Tanya,‟ he said in a cool voice and carried her off

quickly, leaving the others behind.



Tanya

107

„You little fool,‟ he said in a furious undertone. „Do you know how near to death

you came just now? They would have killed you without compunction, had events

taken a different turn.‟

„But with such an accomplished actor on my side, what did I have to fear?‟ she

countered quickly, glancing at him fleetingly.

He gave a short laugh. „You‟re an astute little devil, aren‟t you?‟ he said. „You

did rather well yourself, too.‟

She had the grace to blush, then looked at him searchingly. „Why are you

doing such a dangerous thing, really?‟

„Perhaps I‟ll tell you, one day,‟ he replied shortly, then stopped. Tanya

realised they were outside her room. „Well, goodnight, my sweet, sleep well.‟ His

eyes ran over her, and he smiled. „Perhaps I should come in for a nightcap?‟ he

suggested and held out his hand to her. She ignored it and took a step

backwards.

„I‟m sure you can wait for one more night, my lord,‟ she said coldly and turned

to go, anxious to get away from him before his attentions grew too insistent.

„What, not even a kiss for your betrothed?‟ he said sardonically, his lip curling,

the tender look gone from his eyes. He pulled her roughly towards him and kissed

her brutally, seeming to delight in hurting her, then pushed her from him so that she

staggered backwards. Before she had recovered her balance, he was gone, striding

down the corridor without a backward glance. Tanya slipped into her room and

pushed the bolts into place, leaning wearily against the door and closing her eyes.

For some reason, she felt perilously close to tears. It was not the thought of what she

had just gone through so much as a strange emotion which was churning up inside

her. Quite unbidden, the thought of Nicholas came into her mind, and she frowned

impatiently. Whatever had made her think of him on the eve of her wedding?



Tanya

108

She had no further trouble in sleeping and did not dream any more that night.

She awoke late, wondering for a moment where she was, then the happenings of

the night before came flooding back, and suddenly she realised that this day was, in

fact, her wedding day, and her stomach knotted, fear overwhelming her. She jumped

out of bed and ran to the window, her eyes scanning the far horizon as if in search of

something. She wished passionately that she was far, far away from this dark,

secretive place, from its occupants, and from her prospective husband. If she could

have been outside those massive gates now, she would run and run, in which

direction it didn‟t matter, as long as it was away from here. She felt a mad desire to

run out to those gates, to hammer on them until they opened. She was still standing

there, her body taut with the desire to flee, when two sharp knocks sounded on the

door, and to Tanya they sounded like the knel of doom. The tension went out of her

suddenly, and she drooped miserably, aware that for her there was no escape. She

went slowly to the door and drew back the bolts reluctantly to reveal the tall figure of

Sister Kaptelina.

„Good morning,‟ said the nun in her cold voice. „I have come to tell you that the

ceremony is to take place at midday. The Prince sends his compliments, and has

informed me that he has obtained a dress he wishes you to wear. He will send Sister

Pretovna along with it soon and she will assist you to dress. You only have two

hours, so I suggest you have a tray sent up here to your room. I have already

ordered hot water to be sent up.‟

Tanya thanked her, greatly relieved that she would not have to leave the

dubious sanctuary of her room until it was actually time for the ceremony. Two hours!

Such a short time of freedom left to her, then she would be the Princess

Mensherikovsky, wife of a ruthless man she hardly knew, and his absolute property.

She knew that in Russia men had complete authority over their wives, and could



Tanya

109

beat their wives to death should they so choose. They were allowed to divorce twice,

which meant sending their current wife to a convent, when they were considered

dead. After this, should they marry for a third time, they would not be allowed to

marry again should their third wife die or be divorced. Many Russian women thought

it better to be a third wife, for they would undoubtedly be treated far better than a first!

Women in Russia, for the most part, are considered by their men to be stupid and

uninteligent, and the property of their husbands.

She thought of the dark, cold eyes of the Prince and gave an involuntary

shiver. She could easily imagine him doing such a thing, given the provocation. Still,

she had handled him so far, he could so easily have taken her there and then, in the

coach, then flung her out to the mercy of the wolves had the impulse taken him, so

she should think herself fortunate. She remembered the rare tender look in his eyes,

which somehow transformed his rather harsh face, and thought that perhaps things

might not be so bad after all.

The arrival of the breakfast tray interrupted her reverie, but she found she

could hardly touch the contents, merely sipping a glass of wine and nibbling at some

scented nuts. For once, her normal healthy appetite had deserted her. This was

followed closely by her hot water, and she passed the next hour by washing her hair

and bathing. She dried her hair by the fire, sitting dreamily, brushing it out until it

shone.

Much as her present circumstances frightened and confused her, she

couldn‟t help but appreciate the unaccustomed luxury of being able to dawdle over

her toilet, surrounded by such beautiful things that just a few short weeks ago she

had not even known existed!

The clock in the corner chimed the hour, and her moment of calm passed.

Wrapping her robe about her, Tanya nervously paced the room, working herself up



Tanya

110

into a state of near hysteria in which the Prince‟s dark swarthy features became

inexplicably mixed up with those of Nicholas, and Father Stevanov‟s terrible face

frequently impinged on her thoughts like some dark, menacing bird of prey. She was

almost relieved when at last a tap on the door announced Sister Pretovna, who

turned out to be the little nun of the night before.

She bustled around, anointing Tanya with perfumed oils and putting her into

her shift and petticoats. She sat Tanya down and arranged her hair for her in a

simple yet lovely style, twisting the curls around her fingers, exclaiming at the colour

and texture. Stepping back, she finally announced herself satisfied, Tanya having

refused all offers of cosmetics. With a conspiratorial look, she ran from the room and

returned a few minutes later, carrying over her arm a gown that made Tanya gasp

with admiration. Never had she dreamt that such a dress could exist. It was all white,

interspersed with threads of silver, and it shimmered with a thousand lights. The

sister deftly slipped it over her head, then laced it tightly, smoothing the long narrow

sleeves and arranging the train to her satisfaction. She stood back to inspect her

handiwork and gave a sigh.

„My dear, you look . . . there are no words to describe you. Here, look.‟

She gave Tanya a gentle push towards the full-length mirror that occupied a

whole wall of the closet. Tanya found herself looking at a stranger – such a beautiful

stranger too! The shimmering dress clung to the curves of her body and made her

clear, healthy skin glow with golden lights. Her hair, piled high in a profusion of curls

was the colour of a summer sunset, with its rich copper tints. The face that stared

back at her was pale, but becomingly so, her eyes looking huge and frightened.

„It‟s lovely,‟ she breathed. „Wherever did the Prince find such a dress, here in

the middle of nowhere? And this is no Russian creation I am sure.‟



Tanya

111

„It came from Paris originally,‟ replied Sister Pretovna. „It is a wedding gift from

the Tsaritsa. She had it made, along with countless others and sent here in secret to

while away the long boring hours she has to spend cooped up in this prison. She

was thrilled with it when it arrived, but when she put it on, it made her look positively

haggard, so she flew into a passion and locked it away. She remembered it last night

and offered it to Prince Mensherikovsky as a wedding gift. Was it not a good

thought? And it looks so wonderful on you, almost as if it was made especially for

you. I shall pin it here, so, and I think a tuck just here . . . yes, perfect. It is a little long,

but nothing to worry about.‟

Tanya looked at her curiously. „Pardon me, but you don‟t seem to me to be at

all like a nun,‟ she said frankly. „You seem so interested and wrapped up in worldly

things. I can understand why the Tsaritsa was forced into this convent, but why did

you come?‟

„I followed the Tsaritsa,‟ replied the little nun simply. „I was her chief lady in

waiting and loved her like a mother. When she was banished by the tyrant, there was

nothing left for me, so I followed her here. I had to take the veil to do it, but there, we

will go back one day – in triumph!‟ She broke off and looked at Tanya under her

eyelashes. „But enough of me. This is your day. It is time to go downstairs now.‟

Tanya‟s heart gave a sickening lurch, and all the colour fled from her face.

What with the excitement of the dress and talking to Sister Pretovna, she had almost

forgotten the reason for it all. And now it was time. Too late now to think of running

away or finding a way out. Now she had to put on a brave face and walk down those

stairs to face all the staring eyes – some curious, many, no doubt, envious, some

perhaps admiring, but most filled with enmity. And worst of all, she had to face the

hard piercing eyes of the man she was about to stand beside, to pledge herself to,

perhaps for the rest of her life. A man she knew practically nothing about, except that



Tanya

112

he could be cruel and hard. She wondered wildly what she was doing here, in this

huge, draughty fortress, surrounded by enemies, helpless and alone – so very alone.

For a moment, her courage almost failed her, then she seemed to see Sten‟ka‟s face

hovering before her, his kind old eyes filled with understanding and love.

„Fear not, little Tanya,‟ he seemed to be saying, „This is your destiny. Go

forward with your head held high, cling with both hands to your true beauty – that of

the soul. As long as you have that innate goodness, as long as you remain

unspoiled, what happens to your body doesn‟t matter. You will go on towards your

ultimate destiny – you wil find happiness one day. Courage, my little one, courage!‟

The vision was so clear that Tanya almost swooned and had to clutch on to

the dresser to save herself from falling. Then a great joy pervaded her being, chasing

away all the fears and doubts and giving her strength. The thought that Sten‟ka was

not far away, that he was watching over her was so strong that she felt detached,

upheld. She was only vaguely aware of Sister Pretovna looking at her curiously,

quite unaware that her beauty was literally blazing now, in a way it hadn‟t done

before. She seemed to stand aside and watch herself following the nun down the

stairs, quite oblivious to the gasps of admiration, hardly noticing that the loathsome

priest shrank away from her as if in fear, as if his dark mind sensed something

unusual about her. Then she was standing next to the Prince, and his eyes were

burning into hers, only his cold, stern face betraying him. She heard a clear, sweet

voice speaking and realised it was hers.

The ceremony was long and involved, and afterwards, she could remember

none of it. All that remained in her mind was the Prince‟s cool, firm fingers sliding the

gold band on to her finger, and somehow it had seemed that a door had slammed,

shutting out the part of her life that had gone so that it would be a new Tanya who

emerged from the chapel – Princess Tanya Mensherikovsky!



Tanya

113

This splendid detachment lasted until they left the cool, dim chapel behind,

until they repaired to the Refectory Hall for the wedding breakfast. Then it slid away,

leaving her feeling drained, empty, and very tired. She sat aloof whilst the voices

and laughter echoed around her, hardly speaking a word. The Prince was mingling

with the company, quaffing glass after glass of wine, laughing louder than any, but

his eyes strayed back continuously to Tanya‟s face, as if he could hardly believe she

was there, as if he was afraid she would vanish if he took his eyes from her for too

long.

Her eyes gradually began to take in the strange assortment of wedding guests

assembling around the table. Sister Kaptelina, cool and composed as ever,

appeared to be about the only nun there who was correctly dressed. The Tsaritsa sat

at the right hand of the bride and groom, smiling graciously. She was clad in a gown

of garish yellow satin that made her skin look more sallow than ever, and the watery

sunlight streaming in through the large windows did little to improve her rather

haggard appearance.

Father Stevanov, much to Tanya‟s relief, sat right at the other end of the table,

surrounded by nuns, some of whom had made a travesty of their habits by

adorning themselves with various jewels or gorgeous cloaks. They made Tanya

feel uncomfortable, for she had been brought up to revere the Holy Church,

attending regularly when she had lived with her family.

Tanya had deliberately not looked at the priest throughout the whole of the

wedding ceremony, keeping her eyes lowered. The very thought of being married by

the unsavoury Father somehow made the whole occasion much worse.

She was roused from her reverie by the Prince, who came up beside her and

took her hand, pulling her to her feet. Holding a hand up for silence, he cried, „Your

Highness, ladies and gentleman‟ – with an ironic bow at Father Stevanov – „I give



Tanya

114

you – my wife.‟ He held his glass up to her, then tossing back the contents, sent the

glass crashing over his shoulder to shatter into fragments against the wall. The

others followed suit, until the air was ringing. He pulled out a case from his jacket and

opened it.

„My wedding gift for my wife,‟ he said softly and pulled from it a necklace of

dazzling emeralds, each stone flawless in its beauty. A gasp went up from the

assembled company. Tanya herself was unable to contain a cry of delight. He leant

over her and fastened it behind her neck, and Tanya realised his hands were

trembling. Quite suddenly, she was no longer afraid of him. Perhaps he was cruel,

and a man to beware of, but could he ever harm a hair of her head when the mere

touch of her skin made him tremble? A feeling of power swept over her.

„I can handle him,‟ she thought exultantly. „In his own way, he loves me, whilst

my heart is untouched. Why should I not bend him to my will, for they say that love

makes a man blind?‟

She realised that everyone was clapping and cheering, and she smiled at the

Prince, a smile that for the first time reached her eyes and was for him alone. „Thank

you, Your Highness,‟ she whispered.

„No longer Your Highness, little Tanya, you must now call me Erik,‟ he replied

equally quietly, smiling down into her eyes with a look that made his face tender and

loving. For a moment, she hardly recognised him, then someone called to him and

broke the spell. His face resumed its normal, hard lines, and he turned from her

reluctantly.

The feast went on and on, and Tanya, whilst she ate practically nothing, was

rather recklessly drinking a lot of wine, for it made her feel heady and gay and quite

unafraid. This feeling lasted right through the dancing and roistering that continued



Tanya

115

for hours until the short winter‟s day was over, and she heard her husband‟s voice

above the noise.

„My wife and I will bid you goodnight,‟ he was saying, his cheeks flushed with

wine, his eyes bright with a strange light. „We wish to retire. Tanya, Tanya, where are

you? Come, we will leave our guests to enjoy themselves, it is time to retire.‟

Tanya‟s heart gave a sickening lurch, and she shrank back against the wall,

the feeling of exhilaration leaving her abruptly. So, now was the time! Now she must

go with this man who was her husband, she must submit herself to him, she was his

now, to do with as he willed. She straightened her shoulders, forcing herself to

remain calm. She walked towards him, where he stood waiting for her, his hand held

out. She took it and was surprised to feel his fingers squeeze hers reassuringly. She

stole a look at his profile, but it was quite impassive. A few of the company, the

worse for wine, looked as if they would follow, but a look from the Prince made them

falter and stop, then they were alone, walking up the stairs and along the corridor, the

sounds of revelry and laughter fading behind them. Tanya felt very shy, and her

heart began to thump furiously, making her feel quite sick, as it always did in

moments of stress. He led her up another flight of stairs in silence, then away in a

different direction from her chamber. Eventually, he stopped in front of a huge brass

studded door and opened it. He stood aside for her to enter, and she went in meekly.

She didn‟t look at him but walked over to the huge fire burning in the grate, holding

her hands out to it automatically, trying to stop herself from trembling. She was

furious with herself for her weakness and wanted to recover her earlier feeling of

detachment, but it had quite gone. She heard him shut and bolt the huge door, then

his footsteps carne up behind her.

„Tanya,‟ he said, softly, and she felt his lips on her bare shoulder, burning into

her skin. She jumped.



Tanya

116

„Why, Tanya, you‟re trembling,‟ he whispered. „You‟ve nothing to be afraid of,

my sweet, nothing at all. I will be gentle, I promise. Come, turn around.‟

He took her firmly by the arms and turned her to face him. She raised her eyes

to his face and saw an expression of such tenderness in his eyes that she felt almost

awed to think she could have inspired it. Then he swept her into his arms, almost

lifting her off her feet, and his lips came down on hers. He kissed her until her head

was swimming, and a delicious, lethargic feeling was flooding through her, burning

up through her until she was consumed by it. She felt his hands, gentle at first, but

growing stronger, more demanding on her body, then her dress was crumpled on

the floor, unheeded. His deft fingers were removing her petticoats and shift and lastly

the emerald necklace, which slipped forgotten to the floor. He unpinned her hair,

sending it tumbling down her back, and she stood, trembling, the flames from the fire

scorching her bare skin. She felt herself released and, opening her eyes, saw that

he had stepped back and was looking at her in awe, almost as if she was some

beautiful work of art.

„So lovely, so very lovely,‟ he said huskily, „and you belong to me!‟ He swept

her against him, his hands running over her in a way that made her groan. Lifting her

up, he carried her across the room to the great curtained bed, laying her down in its

cool, dim depths. She lay still and quiet whilst he undressed, her eyes widening at

the sight of his manhood, hard and strong, then he was beside her, his experienced

hands making her hold him tightly, gasping. He stroked her breasts and ran his

hands over her body until she moaned, the unaccustomed feelings sweeping her

body. He took her gently so she felt hardly any pain, only a slight feeling of

disappointment. She was just wondering if that was all there was to it, when his

mouth was on hers, urgently this time, and his hard lean body was taking possession

of her again. This time he sought her out, until she was quivering and crying out in



Tanya

117

ecstasy. The sound of her voice roused him to new heights, and then they were

together, as one, her body vibrating with senses she hadn‟t known existed. He raised

himself up and looked down into her wondering eyes.

„It was all I knew it would be. You are perfect.‟ He kissed her gently and

gathered her into his arms until his breathing grew deep, and she knew he was

asleep. She lay still, not daring to move in case she woke him. Her mind was a riot of

thought. She had pictured this night so many times in the past week, always as

something to be feared and reviled. She had thought she hated him, but now her

feelings were mixed and confused. She didn‟t hate him any more, it was impossible

to do so after this night. What her feelings were, she could not define. True, he had

aroused her physically, had made her want him as much as he wanted her, and her

flesh still quivered when she thought of the delights he had awakened in her. But

what of him as a person? She hardly knew him, and what she did know was not

good – he had taken her forcibly from her country and her home and would

unquestionably have taken her against her will had she not appealed to him as an

equal. If she had really been just a Swedish serving wench, he would have raped her

and probably cast her aside when he grew tired of her. If he ever did grow tired of

her, or if she should displease him in some way, she was sure he would be a very

different person, she had no ilusions about that. He was involved in a struggle for

power of which she knew very little, but which he seemed to pursue fiercely and

ruthlessly. He certainly did not love her for herself, he had shown that in his treatment

of her – but for her physical beauty.

She felt somehow sad, yet happy too in a strange sort of way. She was tired

now, for the day had been one of strong and varied emotions, whilst as to the future

– that remained to be seen. She tried to slip away from him, wishing to sleep in

comfort, but the movement awoke him, and soon she was again in his arms, rising to



Tanya

118

new heights of delight. This time she responded shamelessly, as if trying to bind him

to her more firmly, to make her power over him greater. When at last he was

satisfied, she snuggled up against his side and slept deeply until the first rays of light

through the window roused her. She raised herself cautiously on to her elbow and

looked down at the face of the man to whom she now belonged. In sleep, he looked

much younger, his dark curls damp with sweat, the harsh lines of his face smoothed

out, his breathing even and deep. As she moved, she heard him whisper her name

in his sleep, and somehow it touched her deeply, and she smoothed back the hair

from his forehead, kissing him lightly. He muttered again and, pulling her down

towards him, slept with his face buried in her hair.

When he awoke, he was different. He made love to her again, but seemed

somehow distracted, as if his mind was on other things. He seemed impatient to be

up, and soon leapt out of bed, ringing the bell and pacing up and down the room like

a caged tiger.

„Water,‟ he roared at his manservant who answered the bell, and when it

arrived, sluiced himself down with cold water, gasping and rubbing himself

vigorously.

„Come, Tanya, no lying abed. We are for Moscow.‟ He dressed himself

quickly, then crossed over to the bed.

„Up, my pretty, ‟tis time to leave this accursed place and get back to

civilisation.‟ He swept the covers from her and looked down at her broodingly as she

lay there all rosy with sleep.

„You are too beautiful you know, too beautiful for your own good. I shal have

to take care when we reach the court, that I can see. I‟ll brook no mischief, that I‟ll tell

you now. No one shall have what belongs to me, and to me alone.‟ He pulled her up



Tanya

119

against him until the buckle from his belt dug into her tender flesh, making her cry out

in protest.

„You are mine – no one else shall ever have you.‟ He released her abruptly

and gave her a slap on the behind. „Go and get some clothes on, little one, or you‟ll

start me off again. I shall await you downstairs.‟

Then he was gone, and she was left to attend to her toilet in peace.

Soon the door opened, and Sister Pretovna tiptoed in, her bright little eyes

alive with curiosity.

„Well, Tanya,‟ she asked excitedly. „Wel?‟

Tanya drew herself up to her full height, and her magnificent eyes sparkled

dangerously. „I shall require water for my ablutions,‟ she said haughtily and swept

across the room, wrapping the folds of the beautiful gauze robe around her tightly.

Sister Pretovna flushed and, with an angry look, turned and hurried away. Tanya

was surprised at herself, and at the ease with which she had fallen into the ways of a

great lady, for although her birth was good, she had really had very little opportunity

to acquire the graces which were her birthright.

When Sister Pretovna returned, Tanya hurried through her toilet, talking easily

and quietly until the little nun thawed visibly. She packed the dresses she had

brought from the coach herself, for she was still new to the luxury of owning such

beautiful things and lovingly stroked the garments as she laid them in the huge trunk.

Then she left Sister Pretovna to order the boxes to be carried down to the coach and

found her way downstairs. She was greeted by Sister Kaptelina, whose cold, veiled

eyes also showed curiosity and something that looked very much like envy. Tanya

felt instinctively that this tall, cold woman was not to be trusted and excused herself

as soon as she could. She entered the great hall and was relieved to see that Father

Stevanov was nowhere to be seen. The room was practically empty apart from a few



Tanya

120

nuns. She sat down at the table and ate a hearty breakfast, for her stomach was

empty, her appetite having deserted her over the past few days. She was leaning

back in her chair, sipping a little wine, when a sudden commotion outside made her

sit up, ears pricked. There was a lot of shouting and roars of male laughter,

intermingled with the screech of female voices. The door burst open and several

young men lounged into the room. They were dressed in bright livery and were all

talking loudly, but when their eyes fell on Tanya, their voices stopped abruptly, and

they stood with mouths agape, staring at her rudely. She flushed and rose to her

feet, looking haughtily at them. The man nearest to her, a short, swarthy individual,

with a pock marked but not unattractive face, gave a long vulgar whistle, his eyes

running over her appreciatively.

„What a little beauty!‟ he effused. „And where did you spring from, my

pretty?‟

He made as if to step towards her, but one of his companions grabbed

hold of his cloak warningly.

„Look at her clothes, you fool, she‟s a lady. Not for the likes of us.‟

„With eyes like that, she‟s no business to be a lady,‟ he cried, shaking

off the hand impatiently. He gave an impudent bow, laughing all over his

face.

„Fair lady,‟ he cried, laying his hand over his heart. „Pray tell me your

name.‟

Tanya was spared the necessity of replying, for a cool, dry voice spoke

immediately behind the young man.

„The lady‟s name is none of your business, fellow. Your presence

offends her. Remove it.‟



Tanya

121

The man swung round, his hand on his knife, but when he saw the tall

figure of Mensherikovsky before him, his hand dropped, and he stepped

back a pace.

„Your pardon, my lord, I did not know that . . .‟ he broke off, his eyes

flying to Tanya, and back again, questioningly.

„The lady is my wife,‟ said the Prince calmly, then ignoring the men

stepped over to Tanya.

„Madam, will you accompany me to the coach?‟ he asked formally, and

Tanya, laying her hand on his arm, left the room with him. She cast a fleeting

glance up at his uncompromising profile.

„Who were they?‟ she asked curiously. „Whatever were they doing in

the convent, so much at home?‟

„They are members of the Streltsy guard,‟ he replied shortly. „They are

supposed to have been disbanded by the Tsar, but many of them still exist,

and they are great enemies of his. He has dealt with them severely, most

have been tortured and executed, others banished. However, they are useful

to us. I made your farewells to the Tsaritsa. She hopes to see you when she,

er, arrives in triumph in Moscow, I think her precise words were.‟ At the

mocking note in his voice, Tanya glanced at him again.

„I don‟t understand you at all, my lord,‟ she said, shaking her head, „you

are deep in this affair, and yet you don‟t really seem to believe

wholeheartedly in their cause, but rather seem to be, if you will forgive the

expression, laughing up your sleeve at the whole bunch of them.‟

„You are very shrewd, my dear,‟ he replied dryly. „May I request you to

keep such comments for my ears alone?‟



Tanya

122

She flushed. „Of course,‟ she replied stiffly. „ I should never have

spoken as I did to anyone but my husband.‟

„I do believe you are telling the truth, little Tanya. But remember it well

when we reach Moscow. In the Kremlin, intrigue and backbiting are the order

of the day, and any one of those fawning, scraping popinjays would sell his

own mother for a few kopeks. You must be careful there and speak only in

whispers. Even the doors have ears, so they say.‟

Tanya gave an involuntary shiver. „It sounds very frightening,‟ she

answered. „Do we have to go there very often?‟

„My dear, every day,‟ he replied in an amused voice. „And possibly

every night too.‟

By now they had reached the coach, and their conversation broke off.

Tanya was soon settled in, with a big fur rug to huddle into whilst the braziers

were burning up, for the morning was very cold, with a few drifting snowflakes.

She hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry when Mensherikovsky informed

her that he intended to ride for a while. She leaned back amongst the

cushions, and soon the formidable dark walls of the huge convent

disappeared into the distance. Tanya felt a strange upsurge of spirits, almost

as if she had just escaped from a prison and then felt rather ashamed, for

she had been well treated there. She remembered that in the quick

departure, she had omitted to take her leave of either Sister Kaptelina or

Sister Pretovna and thought idly that she must apologise when next she saw

them. She wondered when that would be, and if they ever would enter

Moscow „in triumph‟ as the Tsarina was so fond of saying.

The miles fell away, and she dropped off to sleep for a little while,

mostly from boredom, then awoke with a start as the coach came to a halt.



Tanya

123

There was a flurry of cold air, and Prince Mensherikovsky climbed in,

brushing the snow from his cloak and slapping his hands together.

„The weather has worsened,‟ he informed her. „The snow is falling

heavily, and it‟s bitterly cold. I wanted to reach Moscow as soon as possible,

but it looks as if this accursed weather will hold us up. So we will have the

pleasure of one another‟s company for a while.‟

Tanya looked at him quickly, for his voice held its usual mocking note, all

trace of the previous night‟s ardent lover seeming to have vanished, and

back again was the sardonic, rather cold man she felt she knew better. She

could handle that man, could try to match his wit with her own, coldly and

unemotionally. But when that man took her in his arms, when his eyes shone

with love for her, then she was lost, able only to respond to him. She would

never make a conspirator, for her heart was too warm; she hated to hurt

anyone‟s feelings, wished only to see the people around her happy, but she

did know how to stand up for herself in the harsh world she had been born

into. Perhaps things would be better from now on, for she had everything that

was craved after and fought for – money, position, perhaps even power

when she learnt how to go on in the court of the Tsar. But what about love?

Did she have love? She didn‟t know, for her feelings were mixed up, hate

and love mingling together in a confusing manner. She was startled out of

her reverie by the Prince‟s voice.

„When we reach Moscow, I shall take you to my home, which is in the

German Quarter of the city. I shall then go straight to the Tsar, to inform him

of the result of my mission, and also, of course, of my marriage. I expect he

will be most enthusiastic to meet you.‟



Tanya

124

„Tell me a little about him,‟ begged Tanya, her eyes shining. „We have

heard so many tales of how he is a monster, that he is all of ten feet tall and

covered all over with hair. Of course, I never believed all those stories, for

they were only for the peasants, but I should like to know a little about him.‟

„Peter has, I think, been born before his time,‟ replied the Prince

musingly. „He has many progressive ideas for Russia and wishes to make

her as westernised as possible. He has not long returned from Europe and

wishes to make Russia more like what he has seen in Germany and

England. He is a great man in his way, although a simple one. He takes as

much pleasure in carving an ornament out of wood or building a boat as he

does from feasting or fighting. He is as much at home with a sword in his

hand as with a chisel. He is a man of many moods and will probably do more

to make Russia great, and improve the lot of the people, than any of his

forefathers. But the church is against him, because he tries to turn them from

their old ways. He has forbidden any man to enter the gates of Moscow

without having his beard shaved and orders every man to wear western-style

clothes. To many of the simple peasants, and also many of the not-so-simple

churchmen, nothing could be more terrible than to have your beard cut. They

believe they will never be able to enter heaven without it. He also taxes the

church for the wars, which is even more unpopular. But overall I should say he

is a great man and, at heart, a good one.‟

„Yes, yes, but what does he look like?‟ enquired Tanya impatiently.

He looked at her swiftly. „Looking high, little Tanya?‟

She flashed a scornful look back.

„You should know me better than that. I‟ll be no man‟s mistress. No, no,

just call it a woman‟s curiosity.‟



Tanya

125

He laughed but continued to scrutinise her for a moment.

„Very well,‟ he replied at length. „Although I‟ve no doubt you will be

seeing him with your own eyes pretty soon, the stories of his tremendous

height are not entirely without foundation, for he is nearly seven feet tall and

towers head and shoulders over everyone. He has a build to match his

height and black hair and eyes. He bellows rather than talks, is uncouth, and

sometimes very crude. He can be kind and cruel almost with the same breath.

But he is, nevertheless, our Lord and Master, Peter, Tsar of all the Russias.‟

Tanya, who had been listening in fascination, looked at him curiously.

„You sound almost as though you admire him – like him even. And yet

you are plotting to overthrow him and place the Tsaritsa and her son on the

throne. Why?‟

„For reasons of my own. I am not content to be an errand boy. I wish

for more power. So . . .‟ he shrugged and turned towards her, his rather

cruel mouth curving into a smile. „But I have much better things to talk of.

You, for instance.‟

„Well, if we are to talk of me, I‟m hungry,‟ replied Tanya simply, seeking to

divert his mind. He laughed out loud. „My romantic little wife,‟ he said

mockingly. „Well, well, let us look into the cupboards and see what we can find.‟

They made a very good dinner, mostly of cold meats and wine, with bread and

fresh fruit. They sat talking for an hour after, then the Prince nodded off to sleep,

rocked by the coach, and slept whilst the short day drew to a close. The shadows

lengthened, and the snow was now falling heavier than ever, making the twilight grey

and mysterious. Tanya could see the dark, slinky forms of the wolves running

alongside the coach and could hear their mournful howling. She snuggled further



Tanya

126

down into the warm furs, feeling safe and comfortable inside the coach. She moved

to light the lantern, and the Prince stirred, then sat up.

„Curse it, have I been asleep?‟ he asked ruefully, rubbing the sleep from his

eyes like a little boy. „I‟m afraid I‟m not very good company. But I was up half of last

night, and the other half . . .‟ His eyes mocked her from under his heavy lids, and he

moved nearer to her. „Ah, the other half was much more pleasant.‟

Tanya blushed furiously and tried to turn the conversation. „How much longer

before we reach Moscow?‟ she asked in an unconcerned voice. „Long enough,‟ was

the dry reply, but he moved away from her. „Are you hungry again?‟

„No, no, but a little thirsty,‟ she replied quickly.

He laughed. „So? I have here a bottle of cherry vodka. I suggest we warm our

stomachs – and our hearts.‟

She could not be unaware of his meaning and answered primly, „I am sure

your heart has no need of warming, my lord. As for your stomach, well, there I am

no expert.‟

He looked at her frowningly for a moment, then gave a twisted smile.

„Touché,‟ he said softly and poured out two glasses. „To our future health and

happiness.‟

They tossed back the fiery liquid, and Tanya‟s eyes watered. He looked at her

challengingly.

„Now we drink to the success of all my plans.‟ Again they drank. „And a toast to

the heirs you will give me.‟

She looked at him sharply but drank the vodka without a word. Her head

was beginning to swim, but she held herself rigidly upright, refusing to lose

face in front of him.



Tanya

127

„And now you propose a toast,‟ he cried, his eyes bright and his face

flushed.

She sat in silence for a moment, with her long fingers curved about the

empty glass. Bending her slender neck, she gazed abstractedly down, her

eyelashes casting a shadow on the velvet smoothness of her cheeks. He

drew a breath, then sent his glass crashing to the floor. She jumped, and her

eyes flew to his face. He looked angry, and she wondered why.

„Curse it, why can I not look at you without desiring you? Why do I feel

about you as I do? From the first moment that you came into my life, I

haven‟t been able to get you out of my mind. I don‟t want to be ruled by a

woman, I need to be master of my own heart. I have always taken my

women like my moods – when I feel hungry. Why should you be different?

What is it about you that makes me feel almost humble – me, one of the

greatest Princes in Muscovy? What is it about you that bewitches me – my

wife?‟

He finished on a husky note and pulled her roughly into his arms. She

flung her head back, looking up into his dark, angry eyes. The exhilarating

feeling of power swept over her again, and her lips parted in a smile.

„I cannot answer your questions. I know only that I am glad that you feel

this way – glad, do you hear?‟

His eyes darkened, and he raised his hand as though to strike her.

„Erik.‟ She used his name for the first time, softly and caressingly. „Erik.‟

He gave a groan, and his hand dropped, then his mouth was on hers,

hard and demanding, and she was crushed to him so that she could hardly

move. She returned his kiss fiercely, abandoning herself to him. He was far

from gentle this time, and it seemed more like a battle than lovemaking.



Tanya

128

Afterwards he turned from her, and Tanya lay on her back, staring at the

swaying roof of the coach. She felt bruised and battered, and her lips were

swollen and sore. Quite suddenly, she felt desperately unhappy, and a tear

rolled down her cheek. She gave a muffled sob and angrily dashed her hand

across her eyes. Mensherikovsky swung round and looked down at her

averted face. With a strangled curse, he gathered her into his arms, rocking

her as though she were a child. Tanya‟s tears began to flow freely, as the

strains and stresses of the last week or two came to the surface. She clung

fiercely to her husband‟s arms, as if trying to draw strength from him.

Eventually,

her grief abated, and, exhausted, she

fell asleep.

Mensherikovsky sat motionless, holding her in his arms, a strange brooding

expression in his dark eyes as he gazed down at the sleeping woman. Then,

gently, he kissed her forehead and laid her down amongst the furs. The coach

rocked and swayed on through the night, while he lay sleepless, only closing

his eyes as dawn was brightening the sky.

Tanya woke to find the sun shining brightly in a cold, pale sky. The

snow, although deep, was packed hard, and the sleds slid easily along. She

flung back the furs and quietly knelt up at the window. In the distance, she

could see a small cluster of buildings. Her surmise that this was some sort of

a coach-halt proved correct when the coach came to a stop, and the flat

Slavic features of Mensherikovsky‟s servant appeared at the window. She

opened it, letting in the crisp early morning air.

„We change the horses here, Highness,‟ he informed her. „You should

be able to get a reasonable breakfast inside.‟



Tanya

129

Tanya thanked him and , turning back to her husband, gently shook his

shoulder He muttered and turned his head. She shook him again, harder,

and he was instantly awake, his hand reaching for an imaginary sword.

„You have no need of a sword, sir,‟ she admonished softly. „We are at an

inn and may go for breakfast. I am starving.‟

He rubbed the sleep from his eyes, yawned, and stretched. „God, I shall

be glad when this journey is over. I could do with a wash – and so could you

by the look of you.‟

She gave an indignant gasp and pulled the mirror towards her. She

looked absolutely terrible! Her hair was in tangles around her face, which was

smudged with dirt, and her lower lip was swollen and bruised. She felt

ashamed at showing such a face to the servant, for it looked, somehow, like

the face of a woman who had just made love, which was of course the truth.

She scrubbed at her face with her handkerchief and tried to straighten her

tumbled curls.

„No matter how hungry I am, I shall have to wash and change first,‟ she

declared firmly and, gathering her cloak around her, swept before him into

the inn.

An hour later, she descended the stairs, the picture of beauty and

elegance. She felt mistress of herself again. With the assistance of the

flustered lady of the house, she had bathed and changed and felt much

better. She curtsied to her husband, who was just finishing his mea l, and fell

ravenously upon her breakfast. She ate a huge meal under the amused eye

of Mensherikovsky, then leaned back with a contented little sigh.

„You look like a cat that‟s eaten all the cream,‟ he observed, and

laughed. „I believe you have held us up long enough, my dear. Shall we go?‟



Tanya

130

She gave a groan and patted her full stomach. „You go ahead, sir, I will

follow in just a moment.‟

She sat for a moment after her husband had left, loath to begin their

tedious journey again so soon. She listened idly to the bustle outside. The

horses were being led out, their hooves clattering on the cobbles, and she

could hear the slam of doors. Then she heard a shout and the sound of

running feet, followed by the thud of blows. Her curiosity aroused, she

crossed to the grubby window and rubbed it, peering out to see the cause of

the disturbance. The sight that met her eyes sent her flying towards the door.

She shot across the courtyard, her eyes fixed unbelievingly on the huge

figure laying about him lustily with his club. Figures were sprawling around

him, but three men were clinging to him, impeding his movement, and

gradually the giant man was overcome. Tanya stood, stock-still, her mouth

agape, unable to think, for the man was none other than her old friend

Nicholas! His blond head stood out against the dark, Slavic men around him,

and he dwarfed the Russians completely. The Swede was roaring with rage,

shaking the men who clung to him. He was brought to his knees, still

struggling, then the tall, dark figure of Prince Mensherikovsky appeared

before him.

„So,‟ he drawled, „a Swedish spy. Cut his throat.‟

„No,‟ screamed Tanya before she could stop herself, horror vibrant in

her voice.

„You need not watch, my dear,‟ he said dryly. „Get into the coach.‟

„No,‟ she cried again, more calm now. „He is not a spy. He is not to be

killed.‟



Tanya

131

His eyebrows flew up, and he looked from her flushed, defiant face to

the huge figure struggling before him.

„So you know our large friend, do you? And so much concern for him. I

think it all the more reason for him to die.‟

Tanya flung herself in front of Nicholas, desperately. „No. If you kill him,

I shall never let you near me again. Do you hear me? Never.‟

His lip curled back, and he looked at her disdainfully. „Who is he that

he means so much to you. An ex-lover?‟

„You know that to be untrue, my lord,‟ she replied quietly, looking him

straight in the eye.

He made an impatient gesture. „You are my wife,‟ he said with deadly

calm. „You are therefore my property. You will do as I say. You have no

choice in the matter.‟

Tanya decided to change her tactics, for she was plainly losing the

battle.

„Listen, my lord,‟ she pleaded desperately. „You do not understand.

This man is no spy, he has only followed me.‟ She saw his brow lower, and

hurried on, her brain racing at lightning speed. „He is my servant. He is dull

witted and probably could not understand where I had gone and followed

blindly.‟

„A servant for a servant?‟ he jeered, mockingly. „Come, come, Tanya,

you can do better than that.‟

„It‟s true,‟ she cried indignantly. „He was brought up in our household,

and when I went back there after Sten‟ka‟s death, I found him existing on

roots and grubs around the ruins of the house. He followed me to the inn,

and they gave him work in the stables. He is just a simple lad. You cannot



Tanya

132

murder him in cold blood, you just cannot. Can‟t you understand that I

couldn‟t bear to have you touch me with his blood on your hands?‟

He stood undecided for a moment, his eyes narrowed, searching her

face. She stood defiantly, her slim body taut as a strung bow.

„I don‟t know why he was omitted from your story when you told it

to me earlier,‟ he said at length. „If he is as simple as you say, perhaps you

had better tell him that I would prefer him not to break the heads of any more

of my men.‟

She relaxed visibly and stole a look at him. Then she stooped over

Nicholas, whispering to him urgently under her breath.

„Say nothing for the moment,‟ she commanded. „Just act simple and

don‟t try to be brave. I haven‟t saved you yet.‟

Nicholas looked up at her, and she was startled by the stark misery in

his eyes.

„Why did you marry him?‟ he asked, hopelessly. „I would have found a

way to save you.‟

„I can‟t explain now. I will find time to talk later.‟ She straightened and

stood calmly under her husband‟s searching eyes. „What are you going to do

with him? Will you let him go?‟

„Not for the moment,‟ he replied. „He would probably continue to follow.

I prefer to have him under my eye. Bind him.‟

Nicholas was tied securely, then on Mensherikovsky‟s orders, hustled

into the baggage coach. The Prince opened the door to their own carriage

and bowed. Tanya got into the coach, and soon they were on their way

again.



Tanya

133

There was silence between them for a few minutes, and Tanya could

feel his hard, suspicious eyes on her.

„Well,‟ he said abruptly. „Do you now wish to tell me the truth?‟

Tanya hesitated, for truth to tell, her mind was still in a confused whirl at

the unexpected reappearance of the big Swede. Then, gathering all her

courage, she looked him straight in the eye and lied unflinchingly.

„I have told you the truth, my lord. I did not mention the man in my

story, for I had practically forgotten him during these last weeks. I saw little of

him at the inn, I used to take him scraps from the kitchen once or twice a

week, but other than that, we never met.‟

„Yet you show such concern for him.‟

„I told you, I grew up with him. He is all I have left of that part of my life.‟

She allowed herself a little sob, which in fact was not altogether false, for he

was all that was left of her native land now. „Don‟t you have affection for your

servants?‟

„I have genuine affection for no one,‟ he replied coldly. „Apart from you,

of course, although I would scarcely describe my feelings for you as

affection. However, I shall give you benefit of the doubt for the time being.

Perhaps I may be able to find him work when we reach Moscow. I shall not,

of course, tolerate him around my house.‟

Tanya lowered her eyes and thanked him quietly. She felt like saying a

lot more but was frightened he would change his mind, so held her peace. A

feeling almost of panic swept over her as she realised how much she was at

the mercy of this man she had married. A wife was completely in the power

of her husband to dispose of as he saw fit. She had no recourse to law, for

the law did not recognise her rights. She felt terribly lost and alone and



Tanya

134

leaned back against the seat, closing her eyes, as if in the vain hope of

shutting out the thoughts crowding through her mind. How had Nicholas

found her? It seemed almost impossible to her that he had done so!

„The only rights you have‟, she told herself sternly, „are those you make

yourself. You must bind him to you, make him do what you wish. It is the only

way.‟

She opened her eyes suddenly and stared across at the dark face in

front of her.

Such a man as this – was it possible? She didn‟t know – only time

would tell.



Tanya

135

Chapter 6

I t was grow in g dar k when Mensherikovsky informed Tanya that they

w ere a pproa chin g Moscow and in ju st a few ho u rs w ou l d b e

passing through the ga tes of the city . Tanya‟s he ar t leapt, an d sh e

fe lt s t ran ge ly frightened.

Sin ce they h a d l ef t the s ta gin g post she ha d n ot e ven see n

Nicholas, le t alon e foun d an o ppo rtu ni ty to s peak to him. Sh e

w onde re d to he rse l f why she ha d r isk e d so much for his sake, for

she was qu i te su re t hat s he di d n ot love h im any mor e tha n

she lo ve d th e Pr in ce . Fo r both thes e men , sh e ha d m ixe d

feelings. She fe l t fo r Nicholas as she would for a brother in a way,

al thou gh the memory of that time by the st rea m could ha r dly be

ca l le d sisterly! She b lus he d even now a s she re ca l le d it an d

thou gh t tha t the ch i l d she had been then w a s gone fo r ever.

M ensher iko vsky ha d done th at for her. And yet, in his w ay, he ha d

been goo d to he r , fo r he ce rta in ly ha d no t been un der an y

compulsion to ma rry he r when she had plea de d w ith him. She ha d a

va gue i de a tha t a par t fr om hi s desire for her, he regarded her a s

anothe r t reas ure to be a dde d to his po sses si ons an d y et t her e

w as no doub t that h is f ee li n gs for h er w er e very strong an d a s

lon g a s they r ema ine d th at way, sh e shou l d b e ab le to con t ro l

him . An d now they w e re a ppro a ch in g M os cow , tha t fab le d city

she ha d h ear d su ch w i l d tales of in Sweden. L i tt le ha d sh e

drea me d then tha t o ne day she w ou l d ent er i ts ga te s as a

Russian Princess!



Tanya

136

The next few hours dra gge d in te rm inab ly , but at last, Prince

M ensher iko vsky turn e d his he a d tow a r ds he r, a l thou gh sh e

had b el ie ve d h im to be as lee p.

‘You should be able to see the city now , we hav e just to ppe d

Sparrow Hills. Lo ok .’

He opene d the w in dow for her , an d sh e l eane d out ea ge r ly ,

str ai nin g he r eye s in to the di sta n ce . The sun w as jus t se t t in g,

it s cr i mson r ays pi ck in g out the city s pr ea d be low them. Her

ea ger eyes t ook in ev ery det ai l , f rom the hundreds of golden domes topped by a forest of golden crosses with the white -walled churches beneath

to the pa in te d pa la ces of the Boya r nob lem en. Th e sun on a l l

the go l d hu r t he r eye s fo r a mo men t. She saw tw is t in g lane s

around square gardens and, dw ar f in g i t a l l , the ci ta de l of th e

Krem l in w ith i ts th ree ma gn i f i cen t ca the dra ls an d hu ge be l l

tow er , i ts w hi te bastioned w a l ls loo mi n g ov er th e tow n l ike a

bir d o f pr ey cr ou che d ov er it s te rr i f ie d v i cti m . Why su ch a

thou gh t sh oul d hav e co me into her mind, Tanya couldn‟t say, but it

was a strong impression. Nevertheless, she gasped in awe, for she had

never seen such a beautiful sight in all her life. She thought that in summer, it

must be even more magnificent as she could see bare orchards and parks

surrounded by snow. She remembered, suddenly, the quiet little cave where

she had spent those pleasant, peaceful years with Sten‟ka and could hear

again his rich voice, filled with emotion as he described Russia‟s greatest city

to her. She stayed unmoving, oblivious of the cold wind whipping her hair

around her face, her eyes avidly drinking in every detail of the scene before



Tanya

137

her. She was only called back to reality by Mensherikovsky‟s voice behind

her.

„Well, little Tanya, and what do you think of our capital city?‟ he asked dryly,

his eyes taking in her flushed countenance and sparkling eyes.

„It‟s absolutely beautiful. I‟ve never seen anything to compare with it in all my

life,‟ she whispered.

He gave a short laugh. „Paris is much lovelier,‟ he replied.

She threw him a puzzled glance.

„You‟re not very patriotic, are you?‟

„No, I suppose I‟m not. I have spent so much time in that city that I feel more

French than Russian. When you meet some of the courtiers that surround

the Tsar, and of course, the Tsar himself, you will know what I mean.‟

He left it at that, and she returned to the window until she grew tired of

craning her neck and sat back more decorously in the coach, for they were

almost at the gates.

„We are only just in time, they will be closing soon,‟ murmured the

Prince, then the coach came to a halt. A row of soldiers outside came to

smart attention, and their officer saluted respectfully.

„Pass, Your Highness,‟ he cried, and then they were through the gates

and bowling along the narrow streets which were crowded with tradespeople,

artisans, peasants, and black-robed priests. Tanya stared at the musicians

and jugglers, acrobats and performing bears, and at the merchants on

horseback, wearing rich fur-lined coats of velvet or brocade and impressive

fur caps. The coachman began to lay about him with his whip as they fought

their way through the carts and wagons, and the passers-by huddled back,

passively sheltering their faces from its cruel lash. As if in a trance, Tanya



Tanya

138

stared out of the window at a small, dirty, ragged child looking at her with

wide eyes. The years rolled back, and she was that child, her arm laid open

by the whip, staring at the beautiful, wealthy occupants of the coach. How

the tables had turned! She found herself vowing under her breath never

again to sink into poverty, never again to have to go hu n gr y an d di r ty .

‘You look qui te fie rc e, Tan ya . I trus t I am no t the cau se o f

your di splea su re? ’

M enshe rikov sky ’s voi ce s ta r tled h er ou t o f he r rev erie , and

she glan ced pe r fun ct orily a t him .

‘No ,’ she s aid so ftly . ‘I wa s jus t making a vo w to mys elf,

tha t ’s all . ’

‘May I as k wh a t? ’ he as ked c urio usly .

She sho ok h er head . ‘Yo u would n ’t unde rs ta nd , ’ sh e r eplied

and t urn ed t o ga ze ou t of the wind o w again .

He looked a t he r f ro wni ngly bu t did n ot p re ss the m a tt er . He

proc eede d to p oin t ou t all t he sig ht s o f in te re st , and Tany a

st raine d he r eye s in t he fading lig ht to pi ck them ou t . The y

passe d t hro ugh the st ree t o f the Ba rb er s, wh er e t he ho rse s ’

hoove s we re m u ffl ed in a gro wt h o f hum an hai r all ove r th e

st ree t , th e res ult o f th ousa nds upo n th ous a nds o f hair cu t ting s

tha t had been le ft wh e re the y d rop ped . Sh e c ould see th e

m illions of lice cr a wli ng t hro ugh the g ro wt h and d re w bac k in

revul sion .

They p ass ed th roug h sc enes o f inc re dible s qualo r , whe re

m en lay in r o ws on th e g roun d, m o st pro bably dr u nk , al tho ugh a s

the d usk p rog re ssed , s hops we re n o w closing behind h eav y



Tanya

139

shu tt er s, and dogs ba rked fie rc ely fr om wh e re they we r e

chained .

‘Soo n i t will be da rk , ’ rema rke d E rik a nd wa ved a lan guid

hand a t the n ar ro w alle ys an d t wi stin g lane wa ys . ‘It i s uns af e t o

ven tur e ou t a f te r da rk , t he re a re thiev es , and som e o f t he d reg s

of h um anit y ou t th ere no w, who do n ot hesi ta te to kill f or a pu rs e

of m on ey o r a j e we l o r t wo . Eve ry m o rnin g t he re a re b odies o f

tho se f oolish en ough to ign ore th e wa rnin gs , and the y ar e

car ried to a place wh e re th e rela tive s can com e and ch eck i f

the y kn o w a m em be r of thei r fam ily is m issing . I t ’s an u ncivilise d

city , this M os co w of o ur s. ’

Tanya shu dde red sligh tly and s ta red ou t of the win do w wi th

wo n de ring e yes . Ev en tually , th ey en t ere d a m o re p ro spe rou s

area wh er e th e building s g raduall y gr e w l arg er a nd m or e

im posing , and at las t , th e coac h dre w up be fo re a beau ti ful ,

paint ed pala ce , whi ch t he Pri nce in fo rm ed he r wa s he r f ut ur e

hom e.

‘W e a re no w ju st ou tsid e the German Qua rter o f the c i ty . I

have se nt a m essen ge r on be fo re us , s o ou r ar rival is e xpe ct ed ,

and a pe rson al m aid h as b een acqui red f or you . I will t ake you i n

and in tro duc e you to th e se rva nt s, th en I m us t p roc eed s t raigh t to

the Kr em lin, to rep or t t o the Ts ar . He is expec ting m e and doe s

not like to be kep t wa iti ng . ’

Tanya clu tch ed hi s a rm ne rvo usly as th ey en ter ed , to fin d a

flus te red s ta ff lini ng them selv es u p in t he hall . Ap ar t fr om th e

house keep er , wh o wa s al so M en she riko vsk y ’s old n ur se , h e



Tanya

140

info rm ed h er , a nd h er pe rson al m aid Ann a, bo th o f wh om we r e

fr ee se rva nt s, all t he o the rs we r e bonde d ser f s. Tan ya ’s read y

pity was a rou sed , and she sm iled kindl y at the wr e t ched line o f

peasa nt s. Ho w t er rible , no t to o wn eve n you r o wn s oul ! She

could im agine n ot hing wo rse . Th e hou seke ep e r , a ti ny , inc redibl y

wri nkled old la dy d re sse d com ple tel y in black , ra th er ove ra we d

her until she smiled, then her little black eyes almost disappeared, and her

whole face shone with kindness.

Anna, the maid, was different. Tanya could not help staring a little and

almost recoiled from the venomous look of dislike cast at her, before the

girl‟s eyes became veiled, and she dropped a curtsey. The young woman

was a considerable beauty, with a hard, brittle loveliness about her. Her face

was a mask of white, her cheeks stained with beetroot, and her lashes

spiked black with charcoal. Her teeth were also fashionably black, and her

dress seemed a trifle rich for a servant. Her dark glossy hair was piled on top

of her head, and Tanya could not help thinking that she looked more like a

lady of the court than a servant. She became aware of her tousled head and

travel-stained appearance and drew herself up, nodding imperiously to the

girl. She saw another flash of hatred. She looked at her husband and saw

that he was looking rather amused. She resolved to ask him about the girl at

the first opportunity.

„What have you done with my servant?‟ she asked her husband before

he left, and he told her abruptly that for the moment he was being kept under

lock and key.



Tanya

141

„We will resolve his case in due course,‟ he continued. „I do not know

at what hour I shall return, but I shall most likely be with the Tsar all night. I

shall wait on you when I return.‟

He bowed over her hand and swept the assembled company with his

hard eyes.

„This is your mistress. You will obey her in all things – all of you.‟

With those last, abrupt words, he departed, and Tanya was left to face

the barrage of eyes – some curious, some hostile, most just apathetic. Her

natural manner came to her rescue, and s he began to issue orders in a calm,

authoritative v oi ce . She saw the little housekeeper looking at her

searchingly, yet somehow approvingly, as if pleased with what she saw.

„Please to follow me, Your Highness,‟ she said in a soft, strongly

accented voice. She threw a stern, intimidating glance at Anna. „My lady will

not need you tonight, I shall see to her needs myself.‟

She then dismissed the rest of the staff and led the way along a bright,

airy corridor, through rooms hung with beautiful tapestries and pictures to a

lovely suite of rooms at the top of the house. This was the terem, where

women once lived out their lives after marriage. Since Tsar Peter had

returned from Europe, this custom had been relaxed, as he had been

delighted by the courts of France and Germany, where beautiful women

were to be seen everywhere. Although most orthodox Russians resisted this,

and many wives were still secluded in the terem, reserved only for women,

some of the younger nobles were allowing their wives to accompany them

into the outside world. Much of this was due in part to the Tsar‟s half-sister

Sophia, a truly remarkable woman for the age she had been born into. She

had managed to become educated with her brother, Fedor, and had thrust



Tanya

142

herself out into the male-dominated world that was hers. She was credited by

some with being the chief conspirator in the bloody Streltsy Uprising that had

brought her to power as regent. The Tsar had been just a boy of ten who had

witnessed the savagery of the revolt, and it marked him for life. Sophia

governed Russia for the next seven years whilst Peter grew up at

Preobrazhenskoe on the Yauza River, just outside the city. There he

engaged in war games with boys from all classes, and from this collection of

stableboys and young noblemen, he eventually created the proud

Preobrazhensky Regiment. The Streltsy Revolt had engendered in him a

hatred of the Kremlin and even Moscow itself, which eventually led to the

creation of St. Petersburg. Sophia‟s regency was overthrown, and she spent

the remaining fifteen years of her life in a convent.

Tanya smiled at the old woman as she was led into the apartments.

„It is a beautiful house,‟ she exclaimed and was rewarded by another of

the little woman‟s beaming smiles.

„Yes, it is very lovely,‟ she agreed in her stilted voice. „I am Anita

Gorov, Your Highness,‟ she continued. „Most of the household call me Nita.

Some to my face, most behind my back. I am Polish by birth and was

brought to Russia as a captive, many, many years ago. I eventually married,

was freed, and finally became nurse to the Prince and his brother.‟

„Oh, I didn‟t know he had a brother,‟ exclaimed Tanya in interest.

„He is dead,‟ replied Nita shortly, then proceeded to show her around

the rooms, then took her on a little tour of the house whilst her bags were

unpacked. When Tanya confessed to being very tired, she insisted on her

going straight to bed and promised to arrange for a tray to be sent up to her.

She personally helped her to undress and wash, and soon Tanya was



Tanya

143

seated in front of a beautiful ornate mirror, arrayed in a breathtaking negligee

of Paduasoy silk, ruffled and frilled, in a soft pastel green. Nita stood behind

Tanya, brushing out her long, glowing hair almost reverently.

„Such lovely hair,‟ she sighed. „Never have I seen such rich tresses,

not since his Highness‟s mother‟s. Now there was a beautiful woman!‟

„Tell me about her,‟ commanded Tanya.

„There is little to tell. She died when the Prince was born.‟ Her voice

was muted, and she sounded unwilling to say more. „His father never forgave

him.‟

„What a great pity. It is so unfair to blame a child for such a tragedy. He

must have loved her very much.‟

„Yes. She had hair that was the colour of the ripe corn of my native

Poland. It used to tumble down her back just as yo urs does, but of course,

yours is much richer in colour.‟

„However is the Prince so dark then?‟ marvelled Tanya.

„He favours his father,‟ Nita replied shortly and brushed more

vigorously.

„What happened to his brother then? If his mother died in childbirth, he

must be the elder of the two. His brother would have been the Prince, I

suppose, had he lived.‟

Nita looked at her strangely for a moment, then she resumed brushing.

„What you say is very true. He would have been. Now there was a lovely lad.

He had his mother‟s looks, so fair and tall, and sweet natured too. Such a

pity!‟

„But what happened to him?‟ asked Tanya curiously.



Tanya

144

„We do not speak of it in this house, and I should advise Your

Highness to do the same. It would be most unwise to mention this matter in

front of the Prince. I will arrange for a tray to be sent up to your room. Is

there anything else Your Highness requires?‟

Tanya hesitated, burning with curiosity, but unwilling to annoy

someone who was quite obviously willing to be her ally. Perhaps she would

be able to find out what had happened when she had settled in and got to

know the old woman better. She shook her head.

„No, there is nothing else, Nita. Thank you for your help. I will see you

in the morning. Good night.‟

The old woman curtsied and left the room, shutting the door quietly

behind her. Tanya sat unmoving, staring at herself abstractedly in the mirror,

her mind a whirl of mixed emotions. She was still there when a discreet

knock sounded on the door, and it opened to reveal Anna‟s sullen face. She

was carrying a tray, and she crossed the room and set it down beside the

bed, looking slyly at Tanya out of the corner of her eye, seemingly

disconcerted by what she saw. Tanya got the impression that the girl was

disappointed at the sight of her, that perhaps she had been hoping for

someone different or plainer. A tiny seed of suspicion entered her mind.

Perhaps the girl was in love with the Prince secretly. Immediately she felt

sorry for her and gave her a sweet smile.

„Thank you, Anna,‟ she said kindly. „I shall not require you further.

Sleep well.‟

The girl dropped a curtsey so small as to be almost insolent, but kept

her eyes lowered. She went towards the door, and Tanya turned back to her

mirror. Inadvertently, she caught a glimpse of Anna‟s face over her shoulder,



Tanya

145

and the girl‟s expression sent an involuntary chill up her back. Never had she

seen such naked hate in one person‟s face for another. She shivered, and

the face disappeared behind the door. She felt very much like bolting it,

although she couldn‟t explain why, but was afraid the Prince would wish to

visit her, so shook off her forebodings and forced herself to eat the food on

the tray. She drank all the wine, wishing to make herself sleepy, for she had

the feeling she would be unable to get any rest otherwise. She tumbled into

bed and very soon was fast asleep. So deep was her slumber that she didn‟t

stir when, a few hours later, a shadowy figure entered, stooped over her bed,

and, dropping a kiss on her forehead, stole away again.

Tanya awoke to such a cacophony of sound that she felt quite

bemused, wondering for the moment where she was. Then she became

aware of her surroundings and realised that the din was, in fact, many church

bells ringing together in close proximity, the whole house vibrating with the

noise. She wondered if they rang this loudly every morning. It was quite late,

and she was just about to ring her bell, when the door opened and the Prince

entered, fully dressed but a trifle heavy eyed.

„Good morning, my dear. We let you sleep this morning to recuperate

from your long, tiring journey. How do you feel?‟

„Marvellous‟ cried Tanya, stretching. „And dying to explore. Will you

take me around and show me the sights?‟

„I‟m afraid there are very few sights really. You would be disappointed.

I have to return to the Kremlin, the Tsar has commanded my presence again.

However, I have also received a gracious invitation for us to dine with the

Tsar tomorrow evening. Soon after, he is leaving on his travels again. You

are lucky that he is holding this banquet in the Kremlin – a most unusual



Tanya

146

occurrence. Nowadays, he holds nearly all his, er, entertainments in the

palace that he built here in the quarter for Lefort – whom no doubt you will

meet tomorrow. He is the Tsar‟s favourite and leads him into every

conceivable excess and folly. Actually, I believe Peter hates the Kremlin –

always has done, but some whim has made him decide to hold this particular

reception there. Do not be shocked by anything you may see or hear.

Despite his recent visit to the West, Peter still has a lot to learn about matters

of taste and refinement. He has a great love of buffoonery and an uncertain

temper.‟

„How did he take the news of our marriage?‟ asked Tanya tentatively. „I

understand he is not very fond of Swedes – does he know I am Swedish?

Did you tell him I am also half French?‟

Mensherikovsky laughed. „ Yes, I definitely emphasised the French part.

But do not worry your little head over that. The Tsar is, after all, only a man,

and one very susceptible to beautiful women – I doubt very much that he will

find any fault with you. As for my marriage, apart from missing the wedding

feast, he had little to say on the subject. I must go now, I will send your maid

up to you.‟

„No.‟ The word was out before Tanya could stop it. „No, not her. I don‟t

want her for my maid. Can‟t I have someone else? Someone of my own

choosing? I don‟t like her, I find her offensive.‟

„Do you now?‟ He looked at her reflectively for a moment and frowned.

„Has she said anything to you? Tell me!‟

„No, what could she say? I just don‟t like the way she looks at me, as

though she hated me, and would willingly do me a mischief if she could. Why



Tanya

147

should she hate me? She has never seen me before. May I choose my own

maid?‟

„Of course,‟ he replied. „ I think I shall get rid of her. Yes, most

definitely. She has become an unnecessary burden. I will send Nita to you

instead. Farewell, I shall see you later. Amuse yourself in whatever way you

wish. I expect you will wish to look around the city markets, perhaps. You

should take guards with you if you do. Only foreign women walk out in

Moscow, I should tell you, most Russian wives stay inside.‟

Before she could ask him to explain his remarks, he was gone, and

Tanya lay back against the pillows, staring up at the ceiling with a little

frown between her eyes. Nita, observing this a few minutes later when

she entered, looked sad.

„Why do you frown, my lady?‟ she asked. „It is a pity to mar such

loveliness with a frown.‟

Tanya smiled at her. „Oh, nothing, just foolishness,‟ she answered

and took the chocolate offered to her. This new fashion, set by the court

of France, was one that the Prince had retained from his sojourn there,

and Tanya had begun to enj oy this little luxury. In fact, she was sure

she would never tire of any of life‟s luxuries. She knew only too well what

it was like without them. Sometimes she would look back upon her

simple, uncomplicated life with Sten‟ka and feel a little ashamed of

herself. How quickly she had acquired a taste for soft living. She

shrugged these memories off impatiently and jumped out of bed.

The morning passed pleasantly enough, exploring the house

further and choosing a new maid from the line of giggling young peasant

girls lined up for her inspection. She chose a shy, pleasant-faced girl,



Tanya

148

with long flaxen plaits braided up over her head and bright kind eyes.

She was obviously quite overcome by the honour that was to be hers

and stammered her thanks, curtseying rapidly. Her name was Veda, and

she followed Tanya to her room in a kind of daze, answering her

questions shyly. She was Russian by birth and had been a serf all her

life. Tanya felt a great pity for her and resolved to see if she could

persuade the Prince to free the girl. She spoke to Nita who produced a

plain blue dress for Veda to wear, and a white apron. Tanya could not

bear to see the drab, brown cloth of the usual peasant garb; it reminded

her too much of what she had once had to wear, day after day.

Veda was soon back, her face flushed, her healthy young skin

glowing with pride. Tanya left her hanging gowns and tidying her

bedroom and began to walk down the corridor, feeling hungry now, and

wondering what time lunch would be served. Suddenly, she was startled

by a hand reaching out and grabbing her arm viciously, the nails digging

into her skin. She gave a gasp and tried to pull away. Then she saw that

her aggressor was Anna.

„So you‟ve lost me my job, have you, you bitch,‟ she snarled, her

eyes spitting venom, her hands clenched like claws. „Well, you little fool,

it won‟t last. It‟s me he loves, not you. I‟ve been his mistress for over a

year. I was sure he was going to marry me. I‟d have made him. If only I

had become with child, I know he would have. Then you come along. I‟d

like to see you dead at my feet, do you hear?‟ her voice rose to a

scream. „He loves me, me! I was right for him, we understood one

another. And now he turns me out, on your say so. Well, you haven‟t

seen the last of me. I‟ll pay you back, Swedish slut,‟ she spat at Tanya,



Tanya

149

who felt the saliva run down her face. A blind, unreasoning rage took

hold of her, and she struck at the girl with all her strength. Anna

staggered back, a red patch, forming on her face.

„Get out of this house, whore,‟ panted Tanya furiously. „Don‟t let me

see your vile face again. My husband could never have loved you. Your

body, perhaps, but not you. As for his marrying you – ha! You don‟t really

believe he‟d marry that far beneath him. Now get out.‟

For a moment, Tanya thought Anna was going to attack her, t hen

she seemed to remember where she was, and she let go of Tanya‟s arm.

She could feel the blood trickling down, where the girl‟s nails had dug

into her flesh. Anna cast a venomous look at her.

„I‟ll get even for that,‟ she grated, then she was gone, running away

towards the servants‟ stairs.

Tanya drew a shaking hand across her forehead and leaned back

against the wall. The incident had shaken her more than she realised, and

she felt ashamed of herself for losing her temper with a servant. She should

have been calm and reasonable. But how could one be calm and reasonable

in such circumstances? At least, she understood the girl‟s hatred of her. In

her eyes, she had supplanted her, taken her place. She felt her anger rising

again, this time directed at Mensherikovsky. How dare he allow his mistress

to be made her personal servant? She wondered whose orders had given

Anna the job but guessed the girl herself had probably had some influence

then and had arranged things. Now she understood the look of amusement

on her husband‟s face, when he had seen Anna curtseying to her new

mistress. How dare he laugh at her? Why hadn‟t he put the matter right,

instead of leaving things as they were? Her hunger forgotten, she hurried to



Tanya

150

her husband‟s apartments. His valet was there and turned a surprised face at

her tempestuous entry. He told her that his master was due back at any

moment and respectfully left her. She paced up and down the room,

whipping herself up into a rage. However, it was about half an hour before

the Prince entered the apartment, by which time she had magnified the

incident out of all proportion. Mensherikovsky stopped short at the sight of

his wife, his brows lifted.

„Ah, Tanya, my dear. To what do I owe this pleasure?‟

„Don‟t try and soft talk me,‟ she fumed. She thrust her arm out towards

him.

„Do you see that?‟ He looked at her arm , and saw the dried blood on it.

„Do you know who did that? I‟ll tell you. Your mistress, your whore, that‟s

who! How dare you, how dare you foist your harlot on to me! She attacked

me, told me you were going to marry her before I appeared on the scene.

Ha! You would have made a fine couple.‟

He stepped towards her, gripping her wrist tightly. „Did she hurt you?‟

he asked harshly.

„No, but I hurt her. I slapped her so hard. She spat at me – me, Tanya

de la Verrière. Let go of me. Let go, or I shall slap you too.‟

Anger flared in his eyes for a moment; then he pulled her roughly

towards him, twisting her arms behind her cruelly. She cried out and

struggled furiously, so angry she scarcely knew what she was doing.

„This is how I love you best,‟ he cried exultantly and, bending his head,

kissed her passionately. She struggled again but gradually her struggles

lessened, until with a moan of surrender, she threw her arm around his neck,



Tanya

151

returning his kiss. He let go of her other arm and, lifting her up against him,

carried her over to the bed.

„My lord,‟ she whispered. „What if someone should come in? It is the

middle of the day.‟

„I don‟t care,‟ he answered, fumbling at the laces of her gown. „I do as I

please in my own house, and no one would dare enter my chambers without

knocking and receiving my permission. Damn these laces. Damn all

women‟s fripperies. Why do you have to wear so many clothes?‟

Tanya laughed softly and helped his eager fingers to unlace the

bodice. He gave a moan at the sight of her white breasts and buried his face

between them, kissing her hungrily. She threw her head back as the now-

familiar feeling of languor overcame her, and the delicious warmth spread

through her body. Sometimes she felt quite ashamed at her own

sensuousness, at the feeling that this was what she was made for. Then all

thoughts fled as she felt his hands caressing her, and for a few sweet

moments, there was only the two of them in all the world. She heard a voice

calling out strangely, as though from far away, and only afterwards did she

realise that voice had been hers. This man might not hold her heart, but her

body was a complete slave to him. He awoke in her such ecstasies, still so

newly discovered that she could not resist him. It was at moments like this,

when they lay exhausted in one another‟s arms and he seemed vulnerable

and young that she felt the most tenderness for him. She kissed his eyelids

gently, wiping away the sweat from his face with her hair, which had escaped

from its bondage and cascaded down her back. He opened his eyes and

looked at her with an expression almost of pain.



Tanya

152

„I love you too much,‟ he groaned. „No man should love a woman as

much as I love you. Without you, I should be only half a man. Or a living

death.‟

He pushed her away abruptly and leapt up, pacing the room like a

caged beast. Tanya stretched luxuriously and held out her arms.

„Come, my wild Prince, give me one last kiss. Then you must help me

dress and do my hair. I will not go back along the corridors to my room in this

state. Anyone could see I have been on a bed romp.‟

He laughed and pulled her to her feet. He kissed her briefly and looked

down at her with amusement in his eyes.

„How quickly you learn, Tanya. You were such a little iceberg when I

first met you. No one would take you for the innocent young girl of just a few

weeks ago.‟

„But I‟m not that girl any more, am I?‟ asked Tanya directly. „You

changed that. And I could not have had a better teac her.‟

„Do I detect a note of bitterness, my love?‟ he asked, his face resuming

its usual hard expression.

„Not really. I have much to thank you for. And now I should thank you

greatly if you would rescue my dress from underneath the bed, where it

appears to have finished up.‟

He stood looking at her searchingly for a moment, then turned and

pulled out the dress. He threw it towards her.

„I don‟t mind helping you to undress, but I‟m damned if I‟ll help you

dress,‟ he commented. „Your shift appears to be under the pillow. I have

some urgent business to attend to. Luncheon is at one.‟ He ducked the pillow

she sent flying at him and was gone, shutting the door behind him. Tanya



Tanya

153

had to laugh but dressed quickly, dreading the return of his valet. She

straightened the rumpled bed and twisted her hair into a hasty knot. She

peered cautiously round the door, then ran to her own room, giggling under

her breath like a schoolgirl. Veda turned a surprised face towards her as she

entered; then her shrewd gaze took in Tanya‟s appearance, from her

flushed, bright-eyed face, to her hastily laced gown and her hair, slipping out

down her back. They looked at one another for a moment; then both began

to laugh. At that moment, Tanya knew she had found a friend and ally. Veda

helped her to change her gown and tried to cover up the ravages on her

face. She did her hair very correctly in a severe style, placing the linen

headdress over it, and although she was untrained in the task, her nimble

fingers seemed quick to learn, and Tanya was pleased with the result. She

went down to lunch, all thoughts of Anna and her threats gone completely

from her mind.

Mensherikovsky greeted her formally, and their conversation, of

necessity, consisted mostly of pleasantries, for they were surrounded b y

servants. He informed her that he would be busy sorting out household

affairs that afternoon, and it would be a good opportunity for her to look

around the city. Nita would go with her to advise her. Tomorrow he would be

at her disposal.

Tanya and Nita were taken by covered sled through the streets to Red

Square, where a huge open air market was held each day. With guards on

each side, they wandered through the rows of shops and stalls, some wood,

some covered by canvas. Merchants shouted their wares, and Tanya spent a

very pleasant afternoon, choosing velvets and brocades, Persian and

Armenian silks to be made into gowns by the Prince‟s seamstresses. She



Tanya

154

chose a beautiful material of amber and green silk to be made up into a

gown, and Nita nodded her approval at Tanya‟s good taste, seeming relieved

to find her new mistress had no trace of vulgarity about her. It was not until

they were speeding home in the carriage that, with a sudden guilty shock,

Tanya remembered Nicholas. How could she possibly have forgotten about

him? She felt absolutely dreadful, picturing him languishing in some dark,

dank prison whilst she flitted around amusing herself. She turned

impetuously to Nita.

„Please, please, Nita, tell me if you know where my servant, Nicholas is

being held. I just have to know if he is all right, and what is going to happen

to him.‟

Nita turned a surprised face towards her. „Nicholas?‟ she queried. „I

know no one of that name. Why should a servant of yours have been

imprisoned? And on whose orders?‟

„On the orders of the Prince, of course,‟ replied Tanya impatiently. „I

don‟t know for what reason. It would seem my husband doesn‟t trust him – or

me!‟ she added dryly. „It is all so ridiculous, he is a little simple and thinks of

me as a dog does his master. All I want for the poor unfortunate man is his

swift release. If Erik does not like him to stay, well, he shall go back to

Sweden.‟

„What does he look like?‟ the old woman asked shrewdly.

Tanya told her.

„Then that is why he is imprisoned?‟ replied Nita simply. „You should

know your own husband. Haven‟t you noticed that almost all the house

servants are women? He ordered it that way when he knew you were

coming. He is insanely jealous. But I shouldn‟t speak of His Highness in such



Tanya

155

a manner,‟ she added hastily, obviously wishing she had not said quite so

much.

„You may talk as frankly to me as you wish, Nita,‟ answered Tanya

soothingly. „Why do you say he is insanely jealous? Of whom has he been

jealous in the past?‟

Nita looked at her speculatively. Then she seemed to come to a

decision. „ I will tell Your Highness the story which has never passed my lips

before. I think you are a person to be trusted and that you will do my Prince

more good than anything in his life before – if he doesn‟t kill for you! For this

reason I will tell you. But the story is long. You must bear with me.‟

Tanya leaned forward and commanded the coachman to drive around

until ordered to return home. Then she turned towards Nita, burning with

curiosity.

„Go on, then, tell me.‟

„I have told you, I believe, that the Prince by his birth caused the death

of his mother and that his father never forgave him for this. Well, his brother

was two years his senior, and the image of his mother. The old Prince

idolised Michael and spoiled him quite dreadfully. And the little Erik was

almost completely ignored, for servants will always follow a master‟s lead. He

was not a beautiful child like Michael, but dark, sullen, and withdrawn. This

was to be expected, of course, in the circumstances.‟

„Oh, poor little fellow,‟ cried Tanya impulsively, feeling sorry for the

small child her husband had once been.

„Aye, you may say so, for it was a poor way for a child to be raised. I

was the only one in the household who had any time for him. I remember

how he would run to me and hide his face in my skirts whenever something



Tanya

156

had hurt him. He was my favourite, although the other servants could never

understand why. As he grew older, he would come to me less and less,

although he always treated me with courtesy and would still sit and talk

sometimes. But I suppose he grew hard, and who can blame him. It was his

way of hitting back.‟

She sighed and shook her head. „Well, things went on in much the

same way, until Erik was eighteen, and Michael, t wenty. Then they both fell

in love. Unfortunately, it was with the same woman. She was the daughter of

a rich Borsar and was very beautiful, although she had no heart at all as far

as I could see. Both Michael and Erik were head over heels in love, and had

Erik applied alone, she would undoubtedly have accepted him, but with the

future prince offering as well, of course, she favoured Michael‟s suit. When

the old Prince was applied to, he was delighted, for he believed in young

men marrying early in life to ensure heirs for his name. He gave his blessing,

and the wedding was set. I remember that night so well when Erik came to

me in a violent rage. He had grown used to masking his feelings and was

generally considered to be a hard, cold man, although I knew better. I think

the girl had led him on a little, probably playing one against the other, for she

was a hard, calculating piece. I can see him now, pacing up and down my

small room, swearing to kill them both, the way anyone who was hurt and

angry would. He shouted that he was going to seek out his brother and make

him give up the girl to him. I tried to reason with him to calm him down, but

he would not heed me at all and went storming out to find his brother. No one

actually knows what happened between them that night, for there were no

witnesses. It is known that Michael was drinking in a tavern, celebrating his

forthcoming marriage with some of his friends. Erik stormed in and shouted



Tanya

157

that he wanted satisfaction from Michael for stealing his woman. Michael

tried to calm him down but finished up losing his temper too, for he was too

used to having his own way and declared he was going to thrash his brother

soundly. They would have no one go with them and went out together.

Michael was a little unsteady, for he had been drinking quite heavily. It was

the last time he was seen alive. We have only Erik‟s word for what happened

that night, and I think he was telling the truth, for whatever folks may say

about him, I will never believe he would do what he did deliberately.‟

The old woman surreptitiously wiped away a tear from her eye as she

recounted the tale. „It seems that the boys came to blows, as would be

expected, and Erik was the stronger of the two without a doubt. He hit

Michael, who, being unsteady on his feet, fell and struck his head on a

kerbstone. He was killed instantly.‟

Tanya gave a gasp and the colour fled her cheeks. „But how dreadful!

Whatever did he do?‟

„What would be expected of a Mensherikovsky. He carried his brother

back to his father, told what had happened, and offered his own life to his

father to repay what he had done. The old Prince never got over it. He

suffered a seizure which half paralysed him and died of a broken heart just

two years later. I think he would quite willingly have killed Erik with his own

hands had it not been for the fact that there was no one else to carry on his

name. I still think to this day that that was the only thing stayed his hand. He

never spoke to Erik again before his death and wouldn‟t even allow him in

the bedchamber when he was dying. So Mensherikovsky became Prince at

the early age of twenty-one.‟



Tanya

158

„And the girl. Whatever happened to her?‟ asked Tanya, wide eyed at

the story.

„She would have married Erik, with half a chance, but he would have

none of her. I believe it was his own penance for what he did. Since then, he

has seemed to blame the female sex for all his troubles and has behaved to

them with almost unbelievable brutality at times. I have seen some of his

sluts who were black and blue when they had displeased him over

something or other. So – that is all he has had in his life since – sluts. Until

you. Now I am hoping that he has found happiness at last – or as near to

happiness as he will ever get. He does love you, that is easy to see. As to

your feelings, that I cannot say. But one thing I will say, my lady, and that is, I

beg you never, never to give him cause for jealousy, play him false in any

way, for I am quite sure he would kill you!‟ She saw the flash in Tanya‟s eyes

and smiled.

„There, there, my lady, I‟m not saying you have any thought or wish of

playing him false, but I am just telling you why he is so very jealous. Can you

find it in your heart to blame him?‟

„No,‟ replied Tanya softly, her eyes bright with tears. „I think it is one of

the most heartbreaking stories I have ever heard. I thought my life was sad, I

suppose a lot of people would think it worse by far than his, but I know only

this – although my family were killed, I can at least remember how they all

loved me, as I loved them, and I can in no way take any blame for their

deaths. I have a clear conscience, which is worth all the gold and power in

the world.‟

„That is very true. I believe he has been living in a private hell all these

years until you came along. And now I have hope for him.‟



Tanya

159

She took Tanya‟s hand and angrily brushed away a tear. „Dear me,

what a stupid old woman I am to fill your head with all these past miseries,

when you should be looking forward to a bright, happy life!‟

Tanya squeezed Nita‟s hand. „No, no, I am so very glad you told me all

this. It enables me to understand my husband far better than I could ever

have done otherwise.‟

With a start, she saw that the shadows were lengthening, and the air

was turning cold. It was later than she had thought. She ordered the

coachman to return home and, when they arrived, went straight up to her

room. She was very quiet whilst Veda helped her to change, then went down

to dinner, still thinking of the story which had helped her to understand a little

better the strange man she had married.

Nevertheless, she was still quite determined to tackle her husband

about Nicholas, for she could not let him suffer for something that was in no

way his fault. As she entered the room, she saw that her husband was

looking very moody and pensive, and her heart sank. She had been hoping

to find him in good humour and decided to leave until a little later the task

she had set herself. She talked brightly throughout dinner, her

inconsequential chatter sounding inane even to her own ears and,

eventually, receiving no response, trailed into silence, casting an occasional

furtive glance under her lashes at the stern, harsh face before her. When

dinner was finished, he would have bowed and left her, but she detained

him, laying a tentative hand on his arm.

„My lord,‟ she asked diffidently. „Have I done aught to offend you? You

are so cold and distant. Can you not tell me what is troubling you?‟



Tanya

160

He looked down at her frowningly for a moment, then shook his head.

„It is nothing to do with you, my sweet,‟ he replied. „I must apologise for being

such bad company. I am just a little worried over a certain affair – I have

heard from Father Stevanov of a rumour concerning the Tsarina and her son.

However, I have come to the conclusion that it is unfounded. It is nothing to

worry your head about. The least you know of this affair, the better.‟

He strode across the room, then turned and shrugged his shoulders,

as if casting off his mood. „The Tsar had expressed a great desire to meet

you and has asked me to endorse the written invitation for tomorrow night. I

think the whole court awaits with bated breath the entrance of my lady wife.‟

He smiled mockingly. „They are all in for a surprise – I believe they are

expecting some sort of a harridan.‟

Tanya accepted the change of co nversation, and they chatted for a

while over the sweetmeats. Now that he seemed to be in a sunnier mood,

Tanya steeled herself inwardly to broach the subject that had never left her

mind.

„My lord, before you go, will you be so kind as to inform me what

decision you have reached regarding my servant Nicholas? I would be most

unhappy to find he is suffering in any way, and if you cannot countenance his

staying with me, pray release him to return to his native Sweden. The poor

lad cannot understand, I am sure, what is happening to him and would be

most grateful for a speedy release.‟

It sounded too much like a rehearsed speech, and Tanya knew it, but

now that she had finally brought the subject to light, she didn‟t really care.

She was determined now to fight the matter to its finish.



Tanya

161

For a few seconds, which seemed like hours to Tanya, a heavy

silence reigned. Finally he answered.

„I was wondering if you had forgotten the wretch, like most women

would, having minds like butterflies. I might have realised that you would be

different. To be quite honest, the man has not entered my mind all day, I

have been busy thinking of more important issues. However, I suppose I

shall have no peace until you have your way. I. shall release the man to you

tomorrow. I leave his disposal up to you. Does that satisfy you?‟

Tanya flung herself into his arms in relief. She had hardly dared to

hope for such clemency.

„Oh thank you, Erik, thank you,‟ she cried.

„I would advise you not to be quite so effusive in your thanks ,‟ he

remarked dryly, „or I may have second thoughts.‟

Tanya laughed. „The relief is mainly because I knew I could not be

mistaken in you,‟ she answered diplomatically and kissed him lightly.

The rest of the evening passed pleasantly enough, her husband

retaining the benign mood, and proving a most entertaining companion, and

after another bout of lovemaking, he returned to his chamber, leaving Tanya

to sleep the night through peacefully. She was up very early the next day, but

forced herself to stay in her room until a more seemly hour, for she was

afraid to show too much eagerness, in case her husband did change his

mind. She picked at her breakfast tray and discarded it carelessly, the

thought never entering her head that what she had just left would, in the

past, have fed her whole family. At last, she could wait no longer and ran

impulsively downstairs to seek out her husband. He was nowhere to be



Tanya

162

seen, but one of the servants, on catching sight of her hovering uncertainly in

the hall, came forward.

„Good morning, Your Highness. The Prince left word for you that your

servant is now in the stables, where work can be found for him should you

require it.‟ He broke off in surprise, for he was talking to her retreating back.

Tanya was gone, running through the house to the back entrance that led to

the stables, quite indifferent to the stares of the servants. She didn‟t care

what they thought at that moment, she just wanted to see Nicholas, for he

was a part of her life that was gone forever, a remembrance of Sweden and

a young innocent girl who had wandered through the woods of her

homeland. She slowed to a walk as she neared the stables, prudence

overcoming her excitement. It must never come to the Prince‟s ears that his

wife had rushed off to the stables to throw herself into the arms of a Swedish

servant. This she had been on the point of doing, but now she straightened

her headdress and strolled decorously across the stable yard, stopping to

stroke the beautiful thoroughbred hor ses , as if that was her sole reason for

being there. Suddenly, she heard a commotion corning from the stable just

across the yard, and a premonition of trouble struck her forcibly. She hurried

across, in time to see Nic ho la s growling with rage, shaking a skinny little

man in the livery of the Prince, holding him by the scruff of his neck. Tanya‟s

cold voice rang out authoritatively.

„What is the meaning of this? Release that man immediately!‟

Nicholas gave a start and dropped the man, who fell on all fours into

the mud and filth of the stable floor. He gave a snarl of rage, and his face

leered vindictively up at his aggressor.



Tanya

163

„I‟ll pay you back for that, you Swedish swine,‟ he snarled, then cringed

as Tanya‟s voice resounded like a whiplash.

„Enough,‟ she cried in a fury. „Must I see you brawling like mongrel

curs, daring to snap when you have been ordered apart? Get out now, and

let me never see you do it again. Leave.‟

The man tugged his forelock and backed out, muttering apologies, but

casting shifty, vicious looks at them both. When he had gone, Tanya turned

on Nicholas in a temper.

„Must I come across you fighting every time I lay eyes on you? I risked

great displeasure to get you out of prison, and what do I find? You are

brawling again. Why, Nicholas, why?‟

„He was rude about you,‟ cried Nicholas, his eyes kindling at the

thought, „because you are Swedish, and he hates all Swedes he said. I

would have choked the life from his mangy body, if you had not disturbed us.‟

„Then it is just as well I did disturb you,‟ answered Tanya with asperity.

„You would have been hanged without delay for murdering one of the

Prince‟s men. How could you be so stupid? What do words matter?‟

„Nothing, unless they be about you,‟ replied Nicholas obstinately, and

Tanya sighed, casting her eyes to heaven. What was the use in trying to

reason with a man? They were all like a dog with a bone, not to be parted

from their ridiculous principles at all costs.

„Well, I forbid you to do anything like it again,‟ she said severely. ‘ I

haven‟t been to all that trouble and worry over you, just to see you hanged.‟

„You‟ve been worried over me?‟ cried Nicholas joyfully and took a step

towards her, hope kindling in his eyes.



Tanya

164

„Of course I have, you big oaf,‟ said Tanya, then took a hasty step

backwards. „For God‟s sake, keep your distance, or we shall both be hanged.

Come out into the daylight, where everyone can see us, then no one will

suspect anything. And don‟t forget you are a simpleton.‟

Nicholas bristled indignantly. „ I am not going to walk around drooling,

not even for you, Tanya,‟ he cried. Tanya clenched her teeth, trying to keep

her temper.

„No one is asking you to, just keep your mouth shut and don‟t look as if

you are a young fighting cock,‟ she admonished. „You should also call me

Your Highness, because if my husband hears you calling me by my given

name, feathers will fly. You must know that I think of you as a brother and

should be very upset if anything should happen to you. It is nice to know that

you are around too, there is something very comforting about big men.‟

Nicholas groaned despairingly. „A brother?‟ he cried. „I don‟t want you

to think of me as a brother.‟

„Well, I‟m afraid you must,‟ said Tanya firmly, leading the way out into

the pale sunshine of the stable yard. „There is absolutely no other way you

could possibly look on me, but as a sister. I am the Princess

Mensherikovsky, wife of one of the most powerful noblemen in Moscow.‟

„And I am a Swedish peasant,‟ said Nicholas sulkily. „Putting me in

my place, Your Highness?‟

„Precisely,‟ replied Tanya, calmly. She hated having to talk to him

like this, but she had decided it was the only way to manage him.

„Do try to have a little commonsense, Nicholas,‟ she added impatiently.

„Neither of our lives would be worth a kopek if anyone so much as saw us

smile at one another.‟



Tanya

165

„But we can escape,‟ cried Nicholas defiantly. „We can go back to

Sweden.‟

„To what?‟ asked Tanya scornfully. „To a peasant‟s hut and cabbage

soup for the rest of my life? That is why l wanted to get away from that inn,

although perhaps not in the way I did, but now I have all the things I ever

dreamed of. It‟s true I don‟t love my husband, but he is an exciting and

challenging man. I‟m sorry, Nicholas, to have to say it, but I don‟t love you

either, not in the way you want, and I certainly don‟t intend going back to

being a drudge for the rest of my life. Now I have had you released and have

repaid my debt to you for what you did that day in saving me from that

wretched man. Now I am leaving it up to you what you do with your life. You

can stay on here with me, as my servant and friend, or you can go back to

Sweden. It is entirely your decision.‟

She faced him, head flung back, cheeks flushed, eyes snapping

dangerously. He lowered his eyes miserably, staring unseeingly at the

ground.

„There is no decision to make,‟ he answered dully, his candid blue eyes

dark with pain. „Where you go, I go, I will follow you for as long as you can

find use for me. You had better go now, people are beginning to stare.‟

Tanya gave a start, returning abruptly to her surroundings. She nodded

briefly, her eyes filled with pity, for the man‟s shoulders were bowed as if with

some mighty sorrow. „You shall be my bodyguard when I ride abroad. Let it

be known that you have my personal approval and tell me if anyone

mistreats you . ’ She smiled gently. „Not that there is anyone big enough to

do so, I‟m sure.‟



Tanya

166

She turned and left him standing there in the middle of the yard like a

blasted oak. She went straight back to her room where she indulged in a

hearty bout of tears that made her feel very much better. She had hated to

talk to him so harshly and had certainly not intended to do so originally, but

she had quickly come to see that it was the only way to make the situation

tolerable. To have him following her about with his eyes, mooning over her

and generally showing his feelings everywhere would have made things

impossible – and most probably endangered his life as well. She had

managed it the only way she knew how . At the same time, all that she had

said was perfectly true. She was fond of him, but as a friend. She did not yet

really know what love was like, but she was quite sure that she would know

the instant she set eyes on the man to whom she would give her heart . By

her nature, she was equally certain that she would never love anyone else.

She knew that man was not her husband . She loved him in a way, a strange

sort of pity mingled with the fierce carnal desires he awoke in her , but it was

not that love of which she had dreamed since childhood.

She gave herself a shake, trying to snap out of the strange mood which

was creeping over her – she felt somehow on edge, as though in premonition

of some future happening as yet completely unknown to her. She jumped to

her feet, determined to spend the day exploring the great house of which she

was now the mistress. She passed the morning, wandering rather aimlessly

from room to room, fingering the beautiful collection of art treasures which

her husband had amassed, hardly able to believe that they were now partly

hers. She had always loved beautiful things, probably because up to now,

her life had been starved of them.



Tanya

167

The Prince did not return for lunch, so she dined in solitary state,

savouring each mouthful of the delicious food placed before her.

She sought out Nita directly after the meal and attempted to learn

something of the running of so great a house, but truth to tell , it interested

her hardly at all, so she wandered off to her room for a nap as she had no

doubt the entertainment that evening would go on until the early hours. She

felt a quivering in the pit of her stomach when she thought of meeting the

Tsar himself and all the grand courtiers who surrounded him, but then she

squared her shoulders and told herself, „You are a de la Verrière and as

good as any of them.‟ After that she felt much better and was able to dress

with reasonable equanimity. She still felt a trifle nervous, but the admiring

eyes of the servants as they added the final touches to her cloth of gold

gown, set off to perfection by the emerald necklace given to her by Erik on

her wedding day somehow gave her a certain fierce courage in her own

beauty. As she descended the stairs, her husband came forward to meet

her, looking very distinguished in a resplendent red uniform, decorated with

orders. His eyes expressed great approval, and he took her hand to lead her

to the carriage.

„My sweet, you do me great credit. I shall be the most envied man

at the Kremlin tonight,‟ he whispered.

The carriage soon deposited them at the great doors, and they were

milling in with countless other guests. Tanya‟s eyes were wide as she gazed

around the dark, small rooms, and she felt very disappointed. Apart from the

noblemen and women dressed in their finery, there was a motley collection

of soldiers, monks, and various repulsive looking freaks, which

Mensherikovsky informed her were very popular at the Russian Court, all



Tanya

168

rubbing shoulders with nuns, flunkeys, and serving wenches. The long,

gloomy corridors reeked of unwashed humanity, and Tanya wrinkled her

nose in disgust, drawing nearer to her husband as several bolder men

pushed up against her.

Soon, ho we ve r , t he y had passed through t he se outer rooms, and

Ta nya gave a gasp of amazement. Inside these ha llo wed inner rooms, it

was different indeed from the thronging corridors through which they had just

passed. A hushed, a lmos t reverent silence pervaded everywhere, the

courtiers and guests treading on tiptoes. The rooms were huge, dazzling,

and rich beyond anything she had seen b ef ore . There were banquet halls,

reception rooms, audience chambers, and throne ro om s , all with high

vaulted ceilings glittering with the light of a thousand candles. Here in the

heart of the Kremlin, it seemed that the other wo r ld they had just traversed

did not exist, all the sm e ll, noise, and confusion was as if it had never

bee n.

The s hi fti ng t hro ng of guests, painted, perfumed, and encrusted with

jewels seemed to dance before her be m use d eyes until she felt quite dizzy.

She noted that as Erik had told her, most of the women present were

foreigners dressed in European fashion and accompanying their husbands.

She saw very few Russian women and was glad she was wearing a gown

made in Paris that showed her to be a foreigner too. She leant against her

husband for a moment, but he held her away from him with a hard, strong

grip.

„Show no weak nes s here, my love, for there are e ye s watching

everywhere, and no motion, however small, goes unno tice d. They are like

a lot of gaudy spiders, each weaving its own li t t le web, waiting for the



Tanya

169

unsuspecting f ly to fall into it s c lutc hes , each spying o n the o t he r ,

wa tc hi ng e very mo ve . ’

As if to verify his statement, an anguished cry suddenly echoed

around the vaulted chamber, a hopeless, so ulle ss c r y t ha t made Tanya

shiver involuntarily. She glanced quickly around and began to think her ears

had been deceiving her, for no one else seemed to be taking any notice at

all. She looked at Mensherikovsky sharply.

„What was that?‟

„Ignore it, my dear,‟ he replied co ldly. „If everyone stopped to li s te n

every time there was a groan or a cry in the Kremlin, no work or play would

ever get done. Come.‟

Tanya followed him submissively, her heart heating suffocatingly.

Soo n they were i nside a huge room which Erik informed her was the

reception hall for the guests. As they entered, Tanya felt a ve ritable barrage

of eyes, some curious, several decidedly lecherous, many envious, most

hostile. Instinctively, her chin went up, and she raised her eyes. There,

seated at the end of the room on a huge gold chair, was undoubtedly, Tsar

Peter. A giant of a man, dressed in plain, almost rough style, looking like

some large bird of prey amongst a flock of peacocks. Why she should gain

such an impression she did not know, for he was, at present, employed in

throwing perfumed nuts into the mouth of a voluptuous young woman who

was sprawled half on the arm of his chair and half across his huge lap. He

was laughing uproariously at some witticism she was whispering into his ear,

and his hand was caressing her bare, white shoulder where her gown had

slipped almost indecently low. Tanya was never more surprised. She did not

quite know what she had expected; certainly not this huge, simple-looking



Tanya

170

man who looked more like a sailor or carpenter or some such than the ruler

of Muscovy. She whispered as much to Mensherikovsk y, who gave a cold

smile.

„You are nearer the truth than you think, Tanya,‟ he replied. „Our

beloved Tsar is all of those things, and more. He is a shipbuilder, carpenter,

navigator, soldier, and of course, as you can see, lover! That delicate morsel

on his lap is his paramour, Anna Mons , who has ruled the roost here for the

past seven years. She is a bitch of no small order and would undoubtedly

sell her soul – and anyone else she could – to the devil, if she hasn‟t done so

already.‟

Tanya glanced nervously round, hoping no one could hear her

husband‟s sarcastic comments, but no one was looking their way. All too

soon, she heard their name called, and they were treading up the aisle to the

couple at the end of the hall. Mensherikovsky bowed low and took Tanya‟s

hand in his.

„Your Majesty. I have the honour to present my wife.‟

Tanya curtsied low and raised her head to find two pairs of eyes fixed

on her face. The Tsar‟s were full of admiration and no little vestige of desire.

She felt a flush rising to her c heeks. The woman‟s eyes, however, were like

two black pools of pure venom. Her thick black hair was upswept in the latest

Paris fashion, and her plump whiteness reminded Tanya irresistibly of a

cauliflower. B ut there was no doubt she was lovely in a hard yet sensuous

way. Her bone structure was flawless, her mouth pouted in a smile, but her

eyes remained twin pools of hate, and her fingers clenched claw-like around

a gold louse comb as though she wished it were Tanya‟s neck.



Tanya

171

Tanya looked calmly back at her, noting the thick white paint which

covered her face, the beetroot stained cheeks, and carefully blackened teeth

and repressed a shudder. She thought of what Erik had said about spiders,

thinking surely this was the biggest, most evil one of all.

Her attention was brought sharply back to the Tsar, whose booming

voice was echoing around the room.

„So, Erik, this is the wife whom you married so mysteriously, is it? My,

my I can‟t say I blame you, what a face, what a figure! We shan‟t be seeing

so much of you at court, then, if you have the chance of romping between

the sheets with such a fine bedfellow, eh Erik? He roared with laughter,

which was soon echoed around the room. Mensherikovsky bowed ironically.

„All things in their place, eh, Your Majesty?‟ he replied smoothly, his

cold eyes taking in the half-naked woman sprawled in the Tsar‟s arms.

The Tsar bellowed with laughter again and boomed out a few more

crude comments until Tanya‟s face was burning. Fortunately, there were

more guests to be received, so they were able to make their escape. Tanya

was quite furious by this time.

„Did he have to talk so loudly?‟ she hissed, fuming. „The whole place

was laughing.‟

Erik glanced down at her impassively. „You got off very lightly, believe

me, my dear. If he hadn‟t liked what he saw , you would have been much

more embarrassed. Our Tsar is not one to mince words, and I have seen

him kick people out, quite literally, who have offended him or displeased him

in some way. You will not find our little court very refined, I‟m afraid.

However, it is our court, and we must make the best of it – for the moment.

Shall we mix a little, and I will introduce you to a few of the notables?‟



Tanya

172

The rest of the evening passed in a sort of brightly coloured haze for

Tanya. She was introduced to countless people and promptly forgot them as

soon as their backs were turned. She met many members of the „Company‟,

a motley collection of men of many countries, faiths, trades, and tongues.

Erik pointed out the inner circle of this company, and she met some of the

leading foreigners who were favourites of the Tsar. There was Patrick

Gordon, a Catholic and a Scot; Franz Lefort, a prime favourite, the son of a

prosperous Genevan merchant whom Tanya instantly liked, for he exuded a

charm of manner that was quite remarkable. She would have been very sad

to know that in a few months he would be dead, struck down with a chill

contracted after one of his frequent drinking bouts.

Tanya also met many notable Russians, amongst them Boyar Lev

Naryshkin and Prince Peter Prozorovsky. Many of these Russians still wore

the national costume of the country, although the Tsar had done everything

in his power to wean them from it.

Erik introduced her to the Tsar‟s chief of police, Prince Feodor

Romodanovsky, a fat, jovial looking man, who, as he informed her later, was

capable of the most appalling cruelties in the interests of the Tsar.

„Quite incorruptible, my dear,‟ he murmured in her ear, „as are his other

chief advisors. Over there is Count Andrew Tolstoy, a notable wit – and there

is the Tsar‟s best loved friend, Prince Menshikov.‟

His lip curled, and it was obvious to Tanya that he not only disliked but

distrusted Menshikov, although there was nothing really tangible. The Tsar‟s

voice could often be heard, calling for „Little Alec‟s‟ opinion on some matter,

and the tall, distinguished looking Menshikov was never far away.



Tanya

173

Suddenly Erik grasped her hard by the arm and began to steer her

through the crowd.

„The Tsarevich Alexis is over there. I will present you to him.‟ He

guided her into a dark corner where she saw a thin, weak-looking boy of

about eight, dressed all in black and looking rather like a scarecrow, scowling

at her from behind a large Bible, which he was trying to read b y the light of

the smoking lamp.

„Your Highness,‟ murmured Mensherikovsky. „Allow me to present my

wife, like me your good and loyal servant.‟

„It is good to find such in this den of iniquity,‟ whined the boy, nodding

carelessly at Tanya. „One day, God willing I will strike him down,‟ he snarled.

„Look at him up there with that whore, while my mother languishes in a

convent.‟

„Yes, yes, Your Highness, but I pray you, curb your tongue ,‟ hissed

Mensherikovsky and hastily led Tanya away.

„A pity the boy is a weak fool, but weak fools can be manipulated,‟ he

murmured in her ear.

„Why does he hate his father so much?‟ asked Tanya, intrigued in spite

of herself. The Prince shrugged. „Who knows? He is his mother‟s son.‟

As he was speaking, Tanya suddenly had a strange yet compelling

impression that somebody‟s eyes were boring into her back. Half reluctantly

she turned to see who it was staring at her in such an insistent manner. She

found her eyes had locked with those of a tall, slim young man dressed

elegantly, yet quietly, making all those around him look somehow

overdressed. His hair was cut short, and his beard trimmed close, and he

somehow seemed almost out of place. She got an overall impression of a



Tanya

174

great, quiet strength. She stood transfixed for a moment, then her heart

seemed to lurch in her breast, and she felt almost as though she had

received a physical blow. The blood coursed through her body, and she felt

dizzy for a moment. It was as though she knew him, had always known him,

and had been waiting for him all her life. She felt uplifted, unreal, and

unaware of anybody else in the room; to her there was only the two of them

– transfixed, eyes locked together. She took a hesitant step towards him,

then he moved and dropped his eyes, and the spell was broken.

Tanya stood shaken to the very core of her being, fighting to collect

her scattered wits, to regain control of herself. The dark, swarthy features of

her husband swam before her eyes, and she was recalled to reality with a

cruel jerk. Fool that she was, to stand there like some moonstruck young

maiden, making eyes at a complete stranger, when she was a married

woman, married to one of the most jealous men in Muscovy too! What

possible hope was there for her? He had come into her life too late. She

turned to her husband and forced her voice to remain calm, placid.

„Who is that man over there, in the dark clothes? I . . . I thought he

looked somehow familiar. I don‟t know him, do I?‟

Mensherikovsky looked at her suspiciously, but answered readily

enough.

„That is Count Ivan Dostoyevskiy, one of the Tsar‟s lapdogs.‟

Stung, Tanya retorted sharply. „He looks anything but a lapdog to me.‟

Her husband‟s dark, veiled eyes flew swiftly towards her, and his lip

curled.

„You seem unduly interested in a complete stranger, my dear. Or – is

he? Have you perhaps met him during your excursion into the city?‟ He



Tanya

175

grasped her arm as he spoke, and his fingers bit cruelly into her flesh,

making her moan.

„Erik, you‟re hurting me,‟ she exclaimed furiously.

„I shall hurt you much more, my pretty, if you do not answer my

question,‟ he snarled at her, his hard, handsome face transformed into a

vicious mask. Tanya found herself shivering with fright, so strange did he

look, but she gave herself a mental shake, determining that he should have

no suspicions, just or otherwise.

„You are talking complete nonsense, Erik,‟ she said calmly, forcing her

voice to remain detached and steady. „ You know very well that I have been

nowhere without the company of Nita, that when I have not been in her

company, I have been in yours. You must consider me quite inexhaustible if

you imagine I should have either the time or the energy for amorous

intrigues, after your attentions.‟

She managed to infuse just the right amount of amusement into her

voice and cast a languishing glance up at him on her last remark. His fingers

eased their grip, and she forced herself to refrain from rubbing the throbbing

red marks his fingers had left. His face resumed its usual immobility, and he

bowed ironically.

„As always, my love, you are right,‟ he replied smoothly. „However,

before we close this subject, I trust for good, perhaps I have now brought to

your attention the fact that I will brook no one, I repeat, no one‟s interference

in any way with anything that is mine.‟

Although his voice was cold and expressionless, Tanya believed him

far more than if he had been shouting or angry. She felt as if a cold hand was

slowly squeezing around her heart, draining her of all will to go on, for if she



Tanya

176

had not known before, she knew now, quite irrevocably that she would never

be free from this man, free to have happiness with anyone else. She would

have to stay by his side, miming and acting out the life for which she had

always longed – which she now had and, ironically, no longer wanted. His

voice recalled her back to her surroundings.

„Well, Tanya, if you have not met the gentleman, and as you evince

such an interest in him, pray let me introduce you.‟ The sardonic tone of

voice, the hard unflinching stare that accompanied these words quenched

the refusal that sprang to her lips. She managed an indifferent shrug and an

expressionless, „As you wish, my Lord.‟

Her heart began its usual loud tattoo as she took her husband‟s arm

and went with him towards the tall, slight figure that, to her, dominated her

entire vision.

„Ah, Count Dostoyevskiy, it is some time since the Court has been

graced by your presence. You have been out of the country, I believe?‟

„Yes, sir, indeed I have. I have been to Europe to try, in my humble

way, to better the relations of our Tsar and our country with those who feel it

would be of mutual interest.‟

The young man spoke stiffly, very formally, and Tanya could see at a

glance that he disliked her husband considerably. Her heart sank. She would

have liked this man, if not for her love then for her friend at least.

„But forgive me, Count. My manners have gone begging. Allow me to

introduce my wife. Tanya, Count Dostoyevskiy.‟

Tanya dropped a curtsey and cast a glace up at the handsome face.

„Your servant, Madam.‟ The bow was even more stiff and formal, the

look he directed at her cold, almost disdainful, with no trace of the former



Tanya

177

admiration. Tanya was so used to the desire that was always in the eyes of

the men who looked at her that she felt as if he had slapped her face. Her

own glance, eyes flashing magnificently, was even colder. She nodded her

head carelessly, wondering what he must have thought of her when he saw

her looking at him with her mouth open, rooted to the spot. He probably

thought her some country bumpkin of no account, overcome by all the

splendour. Well, she would show him! In glacial tones she enquired, „Did you

visit Paris in your travels, sir?‟

„I did, madam.‟

„Then perhaps you had some discourse with my uncle, the Comte de la

Verrière?‟

„I had that honour, yes. He is quite an old friend. Strangely enough,

he has never mentioned a Russian, er, niece.‟

The disbelief in his voice was obvious; Tanya felt a slight flush rise to

her cheeks, and she clenched her teeth to keep back a hasty retort.

„I have, in fact, never met my uncle,‟ she admitted. „I have never even

been to France. My father was his youngest brother. My mother was

Swedish.‟

She was furious with herself for standing there, giving explanations to

this arrogant man, but the need to make him realise that she was his equal

was quite overwhelming.

„Ah, then that would explain it,‟ said the young man with a slight bow.

He turned to Mensherikovsky. „You too, I believe, have but recently returned

to Moscow?‟



Tanya

178

„Yes, I have been to Sweden, on the Tsar‟s business. A long and boring

sojourn – except, of course, for the fact that I met my wife there. My

boredom, needless to say, was immediately alleviated.‟

Count Dostoyevskiy flashed her a quick glance from his brilliant blue

eyes, a vestige of surprise in their depths. „Your marriage then is recent?‟

„Very recent,‟ replied the Prince. „One might almost say we are still

on a prolonged honeymoon, eh, my love?‟

Tanya flushed in earnest now and dropped her eyes. It was not so

much what he had said, but more the tone he used. When she raised her

eyes again, the conversation had turned to state matters, and in a short

space of time, Dostoyevskiy had excused himself and was soon lost

amongst the crowd.

For Tanya, the rest of the evening was a nightmare. She had to

go through the motions of enjoyment , to force food between her lips at

the banquet, when the very thought of eating made her feel sick, to keep

up a light, gay conversation. She noticed her laughter becoming brittle

towards the end of the evening, and her eyes were endlessly searching

among the colourful throng for that tall figure, for just one more look at

him, but in vain.

The relief was tremendous when Mensherikovsky informed her

that it was time to depart as things were getting a trifle boisterous. This

was, in fact, an understatement. The Tsar was all but making love to the

white, painted woman sprawled across his lap and was pouring wine into

her mouth like a fountain. Tanya felt surprised it did not all spurt out

again. Many of the other guests were following his lead, and t he

conversation, although most of it was beyond her , she guessed to be



Tanya

179

crude in the extreme. She took her husband‟s arm and followed him

thankfully to the head of the table to take their leave. Peter was so drunk

by this time that it was just a formality, Tanya was sure he had no idea

who they were. Then, at last, they were out, through the dim outer

corridors, deserted now, and into the cold, crisp early morning air, stars

shining in a clear sky above their heads. Tanya felt a little of the peace of

the night steal into her heart, and she laid her head back against the

carriage seat with a little sigh.

„Well, my love, did you enjoy your first night at court? Did it live up

to all your expectations?‟ asked the Prince.

„I‟m sorry to say I didn‟t really enjoy it at all,‟ admitted Tanya, committing

herself to the truth. „It was all so hot and noisy, and overwhelming. I liked it at

first, but it went on too long. I‟m tired.‟ She sighed again and closed her eyes.

Mensherikovsky leaned back, feasting his eyes on her flawless profile

etched against the dark hangings of the coach. The moonlight turned her hair

into liquid fire, and the firm line of her chin and neck, snowy white, the

rounded shoulders and bosom thrusting up from the low-cut neckline of her

dress took his breath away. He could never look at her without murmuring to

himself, „Mine. She is all mine.‟

Unable to control himself, he pressed his lips into the hollow of her throat.

With a gasp and shudder, she drew away from him as though he had bitten

her. His brows drew together, and he grabbed her wrist.

„Why do you pull away from me? You are usually as anxious for my

caresses as I am for yours. You must never draw back from me, Tanya, you

belong to me.‟



Tanya

180

He pulled her towards him violently and forced her head back, kissing her

brutally until she was gasping. She began to struggle, and this enflamed him

further. He released her and struck her across the mouth with the back of his

hand. Tanya gave a scream and tried to get away from him. There was a

rending sound, and her beautiful dress ripped from shoulder to waist. At the

sight of her white flesh he groaned and pulled her towards him. It was too

much for Tanya. She began to cry, great, dry sobs, lying back passively in

his arms. The red mist cleared from his eyes, and for the first time , he saw

the trickle of blood from the corner of her mouth, and the sight shocked him

to his senses. He wrapped her in his cloak and rocked her in his arms like a

baby.

„Tanya, my little Tanya, you must never make me angry. I love you too

much, too much. I‟m sorry I hurt you. Forgive me.‟

The unexpectedness of an apology from this proud, fierce man stopped

Tanya‟s sobs. He gently wiped away the blood with his handkerchief and

held her tightly in his arms. She let herself sink against him, drained of all

feeling, of all fight. How stupid she had been, to provoke him so. She had

been managing him quite well until the advent of Ivan into her life. She had

been so full of thoughts of him she had been unable to stop herself shrinking

away when Mensherikovsky had kissed her. She would have to be very

careful in future, never let him suspect her heart was elsewhere. She was

sure he knew she didn‟t love him, he must know it, but he must also be sure

that her heart was untouched by anyone e lse. She dreaded to think of the

outcome if he should ever guess her true feelings.

When the coach drew up, she let him support her, still wrapped up in

his cloak, up the stairs to her room. He dismissed the waiting Veda with a



Tanya

181

curt nod, undressed his wife himself, and bathed her bruised mouth. He

picked up her nightgown, then, at the sight of her naked body, gave a little

laugh.

„I think I‟ll join you, my sweet.‟ He undressed quickly and slipped in

beside her, gathering her into his arms, his practised caresses soon stirring

Tanya, despite herself. She was ashamed to hear herself moaning and

ashamed of her body for responding so readily to his when the thought of her

new-found love was so recent in her memory. But after all, she was only

flesh and blood, and lately had grown too used to the clamouring of her

body, to the fierce, strong desire that swept through her when Erik made love

to her.

„Anyway,‟ she thought resignedly as she lay satiated in her husband‟s

arms. „What else can I do? Perhaps it‟s just as well I do feel desire for him, or

life would indeed he unbearable. I must just count my blessings and try hard

to put the thought of Count Dostoyevskiy out of my head.‟

But deep down inside herself, Tanya knew that she would never be

able to do this, no matter how long she lived, or how long she was separated

from him. She knew it was illogical and unfathomable to feel so strongly

about someone she had only met once and who had looked at her with

contempt and indifference, but she was not in control of the way she felt

about him. She could only hope that no matter how long it took or what

obstacles had to be overcome, one day, somehow, they would be together.



Tanya

182





Chapter 7


Tanya reined in her horse and stared with narrowed eyes across the blinding

snow-covered expanse that spread to all sides of her. The snow was hard

packed under the horse‟s hooves, and the air was so dry and cold, it hurt the

lungs to breathe it. Tanya, however, took great gulps and closed her eyes,

letting the wind stir the tendrils of hair escaping from her hat. She felt the

great, empty spaces all around her, and threw her head back towards the

pale watery sun, savouring the freedom, and felt a little peace steal into her

heart.

She glanced over her shoulder at the small, miserable band huddled

together at a respectful distance from her and shrugged. She knew that the

servants were convinced that she was quite mad and only humoured her for

their master‟s sake, and the fact that she was a foreigner.

Ever since the last of the rains had passed, and the thick, slimy mud

that was Russia‟s roads during the autumn had frozen hard, she had

ventured outside the city gates at every opportunity. Admittedly, it was not

often that she was able to ride out, for it was the season for quick, blinding

blizzards, and treacherous snow drifts were a great hazard. But today the

sky was clear, and Tanya had decided on the spur of the moment that she

wanted to get away from the city, away from the pampered yet miserable

existence that was hers.

It was almost two years since she had first set eyes on Moscow, and

the bright-eyed young innocent that she had been then seemed far, far away.

Much had happened during those months; it seemed to her, for although she

had lost her innocence to one man, she had lost her heart to another.



Tanya

183

The face that gazed out over the landscape was, if possible, even more

beautiful than before. It was a more mature face that had about it an ethereal

quality that demanded a second look. The clear, emerald eyes seemed to be

searching far horizons beyond the gaze of ordinary mortals, and the white,

flawless skin had the luminous look of a fine pearl. Yes, they had been easy

months for Tanya, months that had seen the death of both Lefort and

General Patrick Gordon, and the declara tion of war against the land of her

birth, Sweden. The war had begun with a crushing defeat for the Tsar at

Narva, formerly called Rugodiv by the Russians, a large town standing on

the left bank of the Narova River. News of the defeat had but recently been

received, with the Russian losses reported as in the region of 8,000 men.

Tanya hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry, as she had long since

swallowed the old bitterness she had felt towards all Russians. The Tsar,

Erik, and many of his commanders and officers had returned safely to

Moscow, although many more were either dead or prisoners of the Swedish.

Tanya had made it her business to find out if a certain Count Ivan

Dostoyevskiy had been amongst them and had learnt with a sense of

overwhelming relief that he was quite safe. Just thinking of him now caused

a fierce upsurge of longing that flooded her whole being. Sometimes she

longed for him so much she was tempted to just leave everything and set off

there and then in search of him. But then, she would remember the contempt

that had been in his eyes when last they rested on her, and pride and fear of

rejection would stop her.

Sometimes she wondered how much Erik really knew, if he guessed

that her incessant, restless searching for any new pleasure, any new jewel or

costume, stemmed not from an actual desire for such things, but from the



Tanya

184

forlorn effort to stifle the dull ache that was her unrequited love. At the

thought of her husband, her eyes hardened, and she shifted restlessly in the

saddle. The passing months had not improved the marriage that had begun

on such shaky foundations as abduction, blackmail, and lust. The violent

jealous phases had grown longer, the pleas for forgiveness, the protestations

of love, more and more scarce. Since he had returned from the war, the

Prince had been a changed man, at least in his manner towards his wife, for

he hardly spoke to her on anything other than trivial matters and confided in

her not at all. Lately, he had been even more withdrawn, and new, harsh

lines were etched on his face. Tanya believed that it had something to do

with the plot against the Tsar but had never tried to find out, for she had no

desire to know. Sometimes she had the feeling that storm clouds were piling

up on the horizon, and that one day, they would break over her head, without

warning, without mercy. His jealousy also had grown with his absence, and

she was denied even the solace of being alone, for Erik seemed to be firmly

convinced that she was only waiting for the first opportunity to run off with

some fictional lover. The fact that had she had the chance, she would have

gone with Ivan without hesitation counted for little, for she would never have

the chance. Although she was constantly hemmed around by servants – she

often referred to them as guards, for that was their real function – she knew

she would have found a way to escape, had Ivan wanted her. But the bitter

truth remained that far from wanting her, he appeared to hate and despise her.

Despite herself, hot tears welled up in her eyes and she blinked them back

furiously, wondering how she could have so much, yet be so terribly

unhappy. All through the rains, she had thought she would go mad if she

could not sometimes be alone. The nights were even more unbearable than



Tanya

185

the days, for then Erik came to her, to take and subdue her body in a kind of

mindless frenzy that was far from those first weeks when, at least, their

bodies were attuned, and desire, mutual. Yet had it not been for that chance

meeting with Ivan, she might have been happy, might even have learnt to

love her husband in a way. But every time he took her in his arms, she would

shrink away a little, try as she would to stop herself, and Erik had noticed,

she was sure, for it was since that fateful night at the Kremlin that their

relationship had deteriorated. Perhaps the image of Ivan would have faded

just a little after that first unsatisfactory meeting, for she had seen nothing of

him since. But then, a few months ago, they had met again. Every detail of

that meeting was etched in Tanya‟s mind, she could remember every minute

vividly. It had been at one of the Tsar‟s parties when he had commanded that

all who attended must be dressed in a fancy-dress costume and remain

masked until midnight, when a grand unmasking would take place. He had

seen such a function when visiting Europe and had been greatly taken with

the idea. Tanya had not wanted to attend, but the Tsar‟s invitation was more

in the form of a command, for the court did not see enough of „Moscow‟s

most beautiful lady‟. So reluctantly Tanya had had a costume made of white

satin, hooped over broad panniers, and encrusted all over with diamonds.

She had a matching mask and powdered her hair white too. „I will go as

winter, for I love the snow,‟ she had said. Her husband, in contrast, had

dressed from head to foot in black, with only a few twinkling diamonds to

alleviate the costume. He had announced himself as Night, and the striking

couple had drawn many eyes. Of course, practically everyone knew who

everyone else was, but the fun was supposed to be in pretending not to

know. The party soon erupted into the wild, crude horseplay that the



Tanya

186

Russians so delighted in, which Tanya deplored, and which would have

caused their European counterparts to shudder in horror. The Tsar was in

the fore, instantly discernible by his great height and booming laugh, dressed

as he liked to dress whenever possible in the rough garb of a common sailor,

his mask pushed back whilst he kissed the small, white-skinned figure at his

side, improperly dressed as a Turkish houri, and already half naked.

Tanya had become separated from Erik in the press and was feeling hot

and stifled. She had already had to hold off the Tsar several times, for he had

drunk an enormous amount of brandy and seemed determined to tell the

whole room, in a voice he fondly imagined to be for Tanya alone, that she

was the most beautiful lady in the room, and it was such a pity that she was

married to that rascal Mensherikovsky, and damn, if he had seen her first, he

would have married her himself. Tanya had finally managed to escape and

had fought her way through the throng until she found a door and let herself

into a tall vaulted chamber, lit very dimly after the glaring ballroom by a few

smoking lamps. She had leant against the wall with a sigh, pressing her hot,

aching head against the cool stone. She had nearly jumped out of her skin

when a deep, caressing voice had spoken in her ear.

„What, all alone, fair lady? How can this be? Or are you, perhaps,

awaiting some other fortunate fellow?‟

She had gasped and spun round, her eyes flying to the tall,

unmistakeable figure of Ivan Dostoyevskiy! She would have recognised him

anywhere. He was dressed in a costume of russet and brown, and he had

pushed his mask back on to his fair hair. His eyes were dancing with laughter,

his whole face lit up with amusement. He looked so young and carefree, so

different from the stiff, formal man she had met before that her heart turned



Tanya

187

over in her breast. She couldn‟t speak, but just stood quite still, her eyes

devouring him. He threw his hands up in mock dismay.

„What, not speaking to me? I am surely not mistaken in thinking that

you are portraying winter, and my costume is undeniably autumn; it seems

you must follow me, for does not winter always follow autumn?‟ He held out

his hand, and she had placed her own in his before she could stop herself.

She felt drawn to him irresistibly, magnetically.

„Well, sir, then it seems I must follow you,‟ she had answered, her voice

low and faltering. He had laughed gaily and led her through into another even

smaller and darker chamber. That he had no idea of her identity she was

quite certain, for he would never have acted this way with her. He obviously

thought he was stealing her away from some secret assignation and was

light-heartedly flirting. They had sat down on a bench in a dimly lit corner and

talked of silly, trivial things, both of them laughing at nothing. Then, in the

middle of some light remark, Tanya had remembered Erik, with a sickening

certainty that he would be searching for her. She had sprung to her feet,

exclaiming that she must return to the ballroom. He had risen with her and

laughingly claimed a kiss. He had leant forward to lightly touch her lips, and

Tanya had felt as though a flame had seared its way to the very core of her

being. With a gasp, she melted against him, and the light kiss had suddenly

become a long, passionate embrace. Tanya had felt as if her very soul was

passing through her lips and into his, and all sense of time stopped. When he

released her, she staggered and almost fell and had to lean back against the

wall to steady her shaking legs. He had taken a step back and looked down

at her, his eyes full of wonder and . . . something else?



Tanya

188

„Who are you?‟ he had asked, and reaching out his hand, pulled away

her mask before she could stop him. With the dawning recognition the warm

blue eyes had become hard and cold, and he had recoiled. Tanya had read

the contempt there clearly, that contempt was burned for ever in her soul.

At last he had spoken, harshly, cruelly.

„Why, Your Highness, how is it I did not recognise you? Now, from

whom have I stolen you away, who could it have been that you were waiting

for? Surely not your husband? No, of course not – but it seems to me you

are not particular, and give your kisses as readily to one as another.‟

She had wanted to scream and cry out that it was not true, none of it

was true. She wanted to tell him that she had kissed him like that because

she loved him, had loved him from the first moment she saw him, that there

had never been anyone else before, and would never be anyone else again.

But only a low moan had come from her lips, all she could do was hold out

her hands, shaking, pleading hands. But he had spurned her, and the

contempt had remained in his eyes. With a curt bow, he had turned on his

heel and left her there, alone. Tanya had stood as if turned to stone, unable

to move, hands still outstretched. Then slowly, like one awakening from a

dream, her hands had fallen to her sides, and the hot scalding tears had

squeezed out from under her eyelids, running silently down her face. She

stood as if in a trance, until as though from a long way away she heard her

name being called and realised it was her husband‟s voice. With a

tremendous effort, she pulled herself together, scrubbing frantically at her

cheeks with her handkerchief and replacing her mask, then she moved

forward, automatically towards the sound of the voice. She heard her own

voice, lightly explaining that she had felt hot and faint, had left the ballroom,



Tanya

189

and lost her way. She even heard herself laughing at her foolishness, and a

small detached part of herself marvelled that she could sound so

unconcerned. She noted the hard, suspicious way her husband stared at her

flushed cheeks and was sure that then was the moment that had sowed the

seeds of distrust. From that day, things had gradually become worse and

worse between Erik and her. Luckily before matters could come to a head,

Mensherikovsky had been called away to accompany the Tsar on the

campaign against her countrymen, and since he had returned, he had been

busy on some mysterious business of his own, and she had seen little of

him. She spent more and more time in church, partly because it was

expected of Russian women and partly because it was peaceful there. Her

husband now seemed more and more a stranger, and they had drifted

further apart; that he had left strict instructions concerning her was obvious

however, for she was never alone for a moment, and even at night, Nita slept

in a truckle bed by her door. Apart from Veda, who was quite loyal to her,

and of course, her trusty Nicholas, she felt she could trust no one and that

everyone was there to spy on her. However, his prolonged absences at least

meant that she was spared the nights when she would lie awake and tense,

waiting for the footsteps that would stop outside her door, for the hard words

and recriminations that would be flung at her in between bouts of violent

lovemaking. Once she had tried locking her door, but he had broken it down

and had ranted and raved so much she feared for his reason and had never

tried to lock it again. Gone for ever was the cold, controlled man that she had

married. It seemed that the seeds of jealousy, once planted, had become an

obsession, out of his control, and had it not been for the story that Nita had

told her of his childhood and the final tragedy of his youth, she would have



Tanya

190

hated him with all her heart and soul. As it was, she felt merely a sad sort of

pity which made her gentler than she would have been.

Unfortunately, this seemed to provoke him even more, and although he

had never used violence again, had he not been called away when he was,

Tanya was sure it would have come to it eventually. Also, he had been

blaming her for her failure to bear him a son to carry on his line, although

Tanya was secretly glad of her apparent barrenness, for she had no wish to

bear his child.

As far as she was aware, last night had been one of the many when he

had not returned home at all. Usually, he would come home as the

household was rising, looking tired and strained. This morning, Tanya had

somehow felt quite unequal to facing him and, as the weather was clear and

bright, had taken the opportunity to get out into the fresh open spaces to try

to cleanse herself somehow by breathing the untainted air of the countryside,

to get away from the stifling, cloying existence that was hers. She shivered

suddenly, awakened from her memories by the intense biting cold that had

been gradually seeping through her thick furs. She sighed and reluctantly

turned her horse‟s head towards home. From the white, miserable faces of

her followers, they too were cold, for a bitter wind was beginning to stir the

stunted trees, probably a forecast of the snow to come. She spurred her

horse and headed back towards the city gates.

Once inside, Tanya passed through the poorer outskirts holding a

handkerchief to her nose, for despite the biting cold, the inevitable stink that

was Moscow still penetrated from the gutters. The streets were crowded, and

her servants often had to beat back beggars who whined for alms, many

showing repulsive sores and deformities. At last, they were through into the



Tanya

191

more fashionable quarter where everything seemed more quiet than usual.

Very few people were about, and when they turned into their street, there

was no one to be seen at all, although Tanya saw a couple of doors furtively

close, and the bolts shoot home. Puzzled, she spurred her horse onward

towards the house, but before she could reach the doors, a tall figure

appeared out of an alley way and caught hold of her bridle. Tanya lifted her

whip to strike out, then gasped. It was Nicholas! He had been looking after a

mare in foal, so had not accompanied her that day, and she could think of no

reason for him to have left the horse, which was a favourite of hers. She

frowned, wondering what he was doing.

„Nicholas, what is it? Why are you looking like that? What has

happened?‟

„I beg you, Tanya, step down from your horse. There is great trouble

here.‟ His honest face was creased with worry, and at his insistence , she

dismounted and handed the reins to a servant.

„Nicholas, what is it? Tell me immediately,‟ she commanded.

„Take a look at the front door,‟ he hissed, and she turned her head to

follow his pointing finger. Some sort of proclamation was nailed to the

panels.

„Yes, yes, I see it, but what does it say?‟ she exclaimed irritably, and

started to go forward, intending to read it, but an urgent hand stopped her.

„No, stay here. It is the Royal seal of the Tsar. Your palace and all in it

have been put under seal, and your husband has been arrested. We must

leave here immediately, or you will suffer the same fate.‟

There was a gasp and scuffling behind her, and Tanya whirled to see

the band of servants galloping away down the road, to disappear.



Tanya

192

„They must have overheard,‟ growled Nicholas. „Lily-livered skunks.‟ He

spat insultingly, then grabbed her arm. „Come, my lady, we must make all

haste. I will explain fully when we reach some place of safety.‟

Tanya allowed herself to be led away, her mind a whirl of confusion.

She felt quite numb and followed unresisting as Nicholas led her through a

maze of back streets and alleys. Then she caught sight of a small figure

carrying a very large bundle waiting on a corner and, with a glad cry, ran

forward to embrace her. It was Veda! Without a word, Nicholas led them up

to a small tavern, where he quickly arranged the hire of a back room and

ordered a hot punch. Then he led them up to the fire, to warm their numbed

hands. Tanya gave herself a mental shake, trying to snap out of the shock.

She seated herself by the fire and raised her eyes to Nicholas.

„Tell me all,‟ she commanded.

„It was not long after you left,‟ he began. „You had told Veda to check

on the mare‟s progress as you are so fond of her, and she had just come

down to the stable to see how it was.‟

„Yes, yes,‟ interrupted Tanya impatiently. „Get on with it.‟

Nicholas gave her a reproachful look. „You asked me to tell you all, and

I am doing so. To continue. We had just begun to talk, when there was a

tremendous hammering on the doors of the house – we even heard it in the

stable. There was a great deal of panic and running around, then we caught

sight of a troop of the Tsar‟s own bodyguard. One was reading something

from a piece of paper, shouting in a loud voice that the Prince had been

arrested for high treason and that all the house and belongings, including all

the serfs were now the property of the Tsar to deal with as he saw fit.

Everyone was to remain in the house and to carry on as usual until contrary



Tanya

193

orders were received, then he asked for you. When he was told that you

were not at home and that all that was known was that you had left the city,

he seemed very taken aback and obviously at a loss. When he discovered

that you were due back soon, however, he said he would wait, and that must

be what he is still doing. If the dull clod had thought to send to the city gates

for you to be apprehended there, I should never have been able to save you.

Thank the Holy Virgin I was able to do so.‟

He crossed himself fervently. „We hid in the stables until things had

settled down a bit,‟ he continued, „and then Veda was able to sneak to her

room to gather a bundle together, and a few coins, and then we went o ver

the wall. We were not missed, I don‟t think. And here we are,‟ he finished

simply.

Tanya‟s eyes filled with tears. „My dear loyal friends,‟ she said, taking a

hand of each. „How can I ever thank you for what you have done for me?

Without you I should be a prisoner now, under the same charge, no doubt.‟

„But you are not guilty of high treason, surely?‟ cried Nicholas. „The

Prince, perhaps, but not you.‟

„No, not really I suppose,‟ admitted Tanya. „But I am guilty of keeping

quiet when I knew that Erik was engaged in underhand plotting against the

Tsar and doing nothing about it. Anyway, as far as anyone else is concerned,

I should be as guilty as he. Why, I spent my very honeymoon in a nest of

intrigue at the Sudzal Convent, and I had to convince the plot ters I was with

them, or they might well have killed me. So my case would be slim indeed, I

am condemned without a hearing.‟ She spoke bitterly as yet again she

remembered the open contempt in Count Dostoyevskiy‟s eyes.



Tanya

194

„Then heaven be praised we were able to get you away, my lady,‟ cried

Veda, clasping her hands together fervently, „though where we are to go, and

what we will do, I do not know. I couldn‟t reach your room, my lady, for it was

guarded, so I could get no money or jewels. I have only my few pa ltry

kopeks, though they are yours.‟

„Bless you, Veda,‟ answered Tanya. „Luckily, however, we shall not

starve, at least for a while. I have quite a fat purse with me, as I never go out

without one. Praise God I did today,‟ she added fervently. „I also have this

emerald brooch and hat pin, and these rings. We will manage somehow. We

will hire a room here.‟

Just then the landlord entered with the drinks, and he looked at them

very suspiciously, although he mellowed considerably when Tanya tipped

him lavishly. She was about to ask him for rooms when she caught

Nicholas‟s eye, and he shook his head warningly. When the man had left,

she looked at him indignantly. „Why can‟t we stay here? It‟s as good a place

as any.‟

„No, no, Tanya, we cannot stay at an inn, they will all be searched. The

best place for you and Veda will be a convent. I can find lodgings nearby, no

one is looking for me, but your appearance is so striking, they would find you

much too easily. Veda has some more suitable clothes for you in the bundle.

You had best change into them, then we will find you shelter for the night.‟

Tanya‟s chin lifted haughtily at the peremptory tone of his voice. „Are

you giving me orders, Nicholas?‟ she asked sweetly.

„Yes,‟ he answered bluntly. „And either you will do as you are told,

or you must fend for yourself.‟



Tanya

195

Ignoring Veda‟s gasp of horror at such effrontery, the two faced one

another like fighting cocks. Then Tanya‟s shoulders drooped a little.

„Yes, yes, my friend, I suppose you are right. We are back to the

beginning again, are we not? I will place my trust in you and follow you. Now

go outside and guard the door, whilst I change my clothes. Well, go on, don‟t

stand there gawping.‟

Nicholas, his pride slightly dented, hurried outside the door, and soon

Tanya had changed into the plain, serviceable dress that Veda nervously

helped her into.

„It‟s my Sunday best, Your Highness, I‟m so sorry it‟s not grander,‟ she

whispered.

Touched, Tanya laughed and shook her head.

„No, no, my dear, that would quite foil our little plan. It‟s a very nice

dress.‟ She then donned a plain black cloak with a hood that pulled well over

her head, and together, they bundled up her fine habit into the bundle.

„I am ready,‟ she said quietly. They left as unobtrusively as possible,

and it wasn‟t until she was following Nicholas through the cold, cheerless

streets that her thoughts turned reluctantly to her husband. She had

deliberately not thought of him at all since the initial shock, and now she

began to cautiously sound out her own feelings. To her intense dismay and

self-contempt, her main thought was one of relief – that she would never

again have to submit to his brutal embraces, never again hear him ranting of

her supposed infidelities. When she thought of him as he had been when she

first knew him, she felt stirrings of regret and finally a sense of sadness.

What an unhappy life this man she had married had lived! It seemed that he

was unlucky in whatever he did. Unlucky in his childhood, tragic in



Tanya

196

adolescence, a bitter manhood, and a marriage that was doomed from the

start! Now his search for power, that search which she was sure overrode

every other desire he had ever had, had led him to arrest. What would

happen to him? What sentence would he receive from an unforgiving and

hard master? She dared not think.

She returned to the present with a start, as Nicholas stopped before

the gates of a small and seedy-looking establishment, surrounded by high

walls.

„This is a convent, believe it or not,‟ he informed them. „Apparently, it is

famous for its lack of hospitality, but at this moment, that is exactly what we

want. It has a reputation for turning people away, but I am sure that when

they see the colour of your gold, they will be eager enough to open the

gates.‟ As he spoke, he pealed on the great bell, and they heard its tones

echoing around the courtyard.

„It seems pretty deserted,‟ she whispered. „Are you sure it‟s inhabited? I

don‟t like the look of it much, it gives me the creeps. Couldn‟t we go to a

tavern of some sort?‟

„No,‟ answered Nicholas firmly. „It‟s much safer here. Trust me, Tanya,

I‟ll look after you.‟

„Yes, but you won‟t be able to, if we stay in a convent,‟ argued Tanya.

„I‟d much rather we all stuck together.‟

„Just trust me,‟ he repeated tersely and hammered on the door. After

another interminable wait, a small panel was suddenly pulled open in the

door and a face peered through. It was a singularly unprepossessing visage

that presented itself to the trio, and Tanya saw Veda surreptitiously cross

herself and spit. The face was framed by the wimple of a nun, but the skin



Tanya

197

was grey and sagging, and her mouth pulled down at one side. Even

Nicholas seemed a little taken aback but touched his hat politely.

„Forgive me, sister, but these two ladies here are my relatives, and

have just arrived in the city. Would you be so gracious as to let them stay

here for a few days, until I can find accommodation for them?‟

The negative was already forming on the woman‟s lips. When Nicholas

produced several of their precious gold pieces and held them up, greed

shone in her eyes, and she ran her tongue over her lips.

„Wait,‟ she croaked, then the panel was slammed shut. Tanya looked at

Nicholas and raised her brows. „Are you still sure this is the best place we

can go?‟ she enquired.

„No harm can come to you in a house of God,‟ he replied testily. Tanya

had her own reservations about that but held her peace. After a few minutes,

the door began to creak open. The nun held out a claw-like hand and

snatched the money from Nicholas.

„Come.‟ She opened the door enough for the two women to squeeze

through.

„I will get lodgings nearby and come for you as soon as I decide the

best way to get you out of the city,‟ whispered Nicholas quickly, then found

himself facing a shut door. He frowned at it for a moment, then with a shrug,

turned and set off into the dusk.

Tanya and Veda followed the strange little nun, unconsciously sticking

closely together. They were ushered into a narrow cell, which was dank and

cold. The walls were beaded with moisture, and the blankets on the only bed

were dirty and, doubtless, vermin infested. She put out her hand and stopped

the nun as she was about to leave. Her voice was quiet, but full of authority.



Tanya

198

„We paid good gold for this room, sister. I think it just that you have a

fire kindled and bring us some clean blankets and some food. We are cold,

hungry, and very tired.‟

The nun looked surprised at Tanya‟s cultured voice and unmistakeable

note of command, but she nodded her head and hurried away. After a short

while, two more nuns entered with firewood, and soon a cheerful blaze was

burning in the hearth. They took away the old bedcovers and returned with

clean, if rather threadbare, substitutes. Still without a word they left, then

their original acquaintance returned with two bowls of steaming cabbage

soup and black bread. It was a long, long time since Tanya had had such

plain fare, but she had hardly eaten all day and found herself gulping it down

with relish. Two more nuns carried a truckle bed in and silently took away t he

empty bowls, shutting the door behind them.

Tanya looked at Veda and grimaced.

„Cheerful place, isn‟t it?‟ she said ruefully. „I don‟t think I want to stay

here very long. But still, it will suffice until we know what is to happen to us.‟

They took off their dresses and shared out the blankets, although Veda

would have given Tanya all of them. Tanya wrapped up her purse and jewels

in her bundle of clothes and put them next to her bed.

„Nonsense, Veda, you will freeze to death when that paltry fire goes

out. They haven‟t even left any wood so that we can make it up.‟

They lay down under the thin blankets in their shifts, with their cloaks

wrapped around them for further warmth. Tanya blew out the single candle,

and soon Veda was snoring gently. Tanya, however, lay awake for a long

time, staring up into the blackness. How far away this morning seemed when

she had awoken with nothing more on her mind than which dress to wear! So



Tanya

199

much had happened since then, her whole life had changed in these few

short hours. She was still wondering what the future held for her when she

drifted off into an uneasy slumber. In the midst of her troubled sleep, she

seemed to have a strange dream. She was lying in the bed at the

Mensherikovsky palace, waiting for Erik to come to her. At first, she was

eager for him to come, but gradually a feeling of fear crept over her until she

found herself lying dreading every slight noise. She heard scuffles and a

stifled cry, then to her unutterable horror, the evil countenance of Father

Stevanov loomed over her, leering. She gave a cry and awoke to find herself

lying on the miserable bed, bathed in sweat despite the now intense cold of

the tiny cell. She was quite alone. She didn‟t realise how alone until she

glanced for comfort towards the truckle bed in which Veda should be

sleeping soundly. It was quite empty!

Her heart beating hard, Tanya sat up in bed and glanced fearfully around

the small room. The moon was shining quite brightly through the tiny window

and showed clearly the ruffled covers of the empty bed. Tanya felt the hairs

rise at the back of her neck as the stillness of the night was suddenly broken.

She could hear a muffled sobbing noise that seemed to be coming from an

adjoining cell. Could it be Veda? Tanya slipped silently out of bed and tiptoed

to the door. All was quite still, and she lifted the latch cautiously and pushed

the door. Nothing happened!

„They must have locked me in,‟ she thought wildly and only just managed

to stop herself from screaming out and hammering on the door. She forced

herself to think calmly and, from a hidden corner of her mind , remembered

that the crude door had no bolt, merely a wooden bar that could be placed

across it. She spun round, her eyes searching the room feverishly. Her gaze



Tanya

200

alighted on the empty bed, and she saw it was made of thin planks of wood.

The space between the edge of the door and the wall looked wide enough

for one of these to pass through, so without further hesitation, she exerted all

her strength and tore a strip of wood from the bed. She quickly put on her

dress, then unwrapping the bundle of clothes, took out her purse and jewels

and tucked them into the belt around her waist. Her heart beating loudly, she

swiftly inserted the piece of wood and tried to lift the heavy wooden bar that

was keeping the door locked. It was heavier than she thought and took quite

a struggle to raise, but she managed it eventually. The crash as the wooden

bar fell to the floor outside seemed to echo all around the convent. Tanya

slipped through and stood for a moment with her back pressed against the

wall, panting, trying to get her bearings. Then she heard the sobbing again,

which had stopped abruptly when the bar had fallen to the floor. It was

coming from a cell opposite, and now that she could hear it more clearly, she

began to doubt that it was indeed Veda. It sounded childish somehow. She

shut her door and put the heavy bar back into place over her cell door and

then tiptoed over to the other room. She lifted the bar out as quietly as she

could and cautiously opened the door. It squeaked loudly, and her heart

jumped. She was about to step backwards, ready for flight, when she caught

sight of the solitary occupant of the room. It was a small urchin such as could

be seen the length and breadth of Moscow, filthy dirty and dressed in rags.

He was sniffing loudly and looking at her in some astonishment.

„Are you an angel?‟ he asked hopefully, wiping his nose with his dirty

sleeve. „Have you come to take me to heaven? Please hurry up and take me,

I don‟t want to stay here. They‟re going to kill me.‟



Tanya

201

„They?‟ queried Tanya, stepping into the room and pushing the door

closed. „Who is going to kill you, little one?‟

„That horrid man what brung me here,‟ replied the urchin, sniffing

dolefully. „Ever so ugly he was, and he said I would serve his purpose. Don‟t

know what that is, but I bet they‟re going to kill me. I was so frightened, but

I‟ll be all right now there‟s an angel here, won‟t I? Can we go to heaven

now?‟

„Unfortunately, I‟m not an angel, far from it, I‟m afraid,‟ replied Tanya.

„But whatever makes you think someone is going to kill you? I mean, this is a

convent, nothing bad could happen here, surely?‟

„It could in this convent,‟ replied the boy. „Everyone round here knows

this is an evil place. People go miles out of their way to avoid coming near

here. All sorts of horrid things go on – you should hear the cries and screams

that‟s heard late at night.‟

Tanya was just about to scoff at his fears, when, as if to echo his

words, a scream rang out from somewhere below them, then it was choked

off. Tanya felt quite sick with fear, then she crossed the room to the boy.

„Come on then, let‟s try to get out of here. Give me your hand. If we

can only find Nicholas, he will help us find Veda and get away.‟

She took hold of his hand, but before either of them could move, the

door swung open and a figure stood framed in the opening. Tanya gave a

choked gasp and stepped backwards, shuddering. There was no mistaking

the deformed and evil face of Father Stevanov. So it hadn‟t been a dream

when he was bending over her. It had been real. She could only wish that

this was a dream. What evil chance had made Nicholas pick this of all places

for sanctuary! If only he had known.



Tanya

202

With a tremendous effort, she managed to pull herself together, trying

to fight down the overpowering fear that this man inspired in her.

„Why, Father Stevanov, what are you doing in this convent? And why is

this little boy being held here? What is going on – where is my maid?‟

His repulsive eyes swept over her, seeming to search out her very

soul, uncovering all the fear she was trying to hide.

„So it really is you,‟ he hissed. „I thought my eyes must have been

deceiving me, but your servant soon convinced me.‟ Then his voice became

blank. „I shall ask any questions that need to be asked,‟ he said coldly. „I

don‟t know how you got out of your cell, but you shall not escape this one so

easily. It has a lock as you can see, and here is the key. When midnight

comes, you shall be fetched, both of you. We have need of your, er,

services.‟ He turned to leave.

„I have a score to settle with you, Princess. Your servant has

confessed that it was you who betrayed our cause, and your husband. You

shall suffer for it.‟

Before Tanya could answer, he had stepped out, and the key grated in

the lock, followed by the thud of the heavy bar falling into place. Despair

engulfed her, and she sat down heavily on the narrow bed, staring

unseeingly before her. What could he have meant? Why should Veda, whom

she had liked and trusted, have betrayed her in such a way? She had had

nothing more to do with the plot to overthrow the Tsar and knew nothing of

why Erik had been arrested. Why should Veda have said such a thing?

Perhaps she had been threatened and had been frightened, that was most

probable. Her most pressing problem, however, was how to escape from this

dreadful place. She glanced around the cell, but apart from a small barred



Tanya

203

window, there was no way out, and certainly, even the little boy could not

squeeze through that. How far off was midnight? And what would happen to

them when that hour arrived? She dreaded to even think of it. She

discounted most of what the child had said as peasant superstition – and yet

she had heard that scream with her own ears and could not quite shake off

the uncomfortable feeling that there was more than superstition in what he

had said. Where Father Stevanov was concerned, anything was possible. If

only Nicholas would come, he would know how to get them all out of this

place. If only she could see Ivan just once more, have him hold her in his

arms as he had done that night before he had recognised her. But if she

should see him again, his eyes would hold no tenderness for her, only scorn

and contempt. She found her eyes filling with tears of self-pity, and only a

look at the scared face of her silent companion stopped her from sobbing

aloud. It would do no good to sit here moping, she must think of something.

But what could she do? Never in all her life had she felt so helpless and

afraid. Not even the night before her wedding. She had known then that Erik

would let no harm come to her, unless he himself had inflicted it. She would

even be glad to see him come through the door now.

The minutes dragged by with agonising slowness, and soon she saw

that the boy was fast asleep. How she envied him! She had no way of

knowing how long she sat there, for the moon had disappeared behind a

cloud, and the room was now in complete darkness. There was no candle or

any means of lighting at all. Finally, she slipped into an uneasy doze, waking

with a start every few minutes. When she heard the sound of the key grating

in the lock, her heart leapt into her mouth, and she jumped up, stumbling

back against the bed and awaking the child. She felt his small cold hand



Tanya

204

steal into hers, and took it with a firm grip, determined to protect him as best

she could. There were two nuns in the doorway and, behind them, two men

in a vaguely familiar uniform. Then she recognised it – it was the one that

she had seen at the Sudzal convent – the uniform of the banned Streltsy

guard. The nun holding the lamp jerked her head, indicating that they should

follow, and Tanya obeyed, guessing it would be no good to try to fight or

escape just now. The two guards fell in behind them, and the small

procession walked to the end of the corridor, through an archway, then down

a steep flight of steps. The bottom of the steps was in complete darkness,

and she stumbled uncertainly in the weak light of the lamp. They turned

several corners, until they saw a light filtering through a heavy curtain. She

and the boy were pushed roughly through and stood blinking, their eyes

unaccustomed to the blaze of lights. When she could see, Tanya gave a

gasp. The whole room, large with a high vaulted ceiling, was draped in black,

and in front of them, also draped in black was what looked like an altar of

some kind. There was some sort of horrible effigy over this altar, and Tanya

quickly looked away. Standing before the altar, dressed in long robes

covered with strange signs and symbols and obviously presiding over this

unholy gathering, was Father Stevanov. Many nuns were flitting around,

some in their habits, others dressed in diaphanous garments that showed

practically all of their bodies clearly. Tanya was shocked at such sacrilege

inside a supposed house of God and could only guess at the true meaning of

it all. It was obviously some sort of black magic rite that they were being

forced to attend, and she felt panic welling up inside her. To what horrors

were they to be subjected this night? Undoubtedly, it would all end in death

for the two unfortunate prisoners. Tanya felt a growing sense of anger that



Tanya

205

she and this poor child should have to die at the hands of such inhuman

fiends as these. She pulled herself up to her full height and pulled the boy

close to her, putting a protective arm around his shoulders. She would show

them how a de la Verrière could die! If only she was not so afraid. Suddenly

her eyes fell upon the objects that were lying on the altar before the

sickening effigy that seemed to dwarf the whole room. It was a chalice and

knife. With a cold surge of fright, she realised what they meant – they were to

be sacrificed – killed for reasons only these unholy creatures could fathom,

to further whatever evil plans they had.

Father Stevanov‟s voice cut suddenly across her thoughts.

„Strip them.‟

Tanya could hardly believe her ears. This could not be happening to

her. She would die, yes, but die proudly, die fighting. None of these evil men

or women would lay a hand upon her body unless it be dead. Her hands

clenched into claws, and she backed away, then her eyes fell upon the knife

on the altar, and she almost laughed aloud. So be it! She would sell her life

and that of the boy dearly. Giving the child a push before her, she sprang

towards the altar and her fingers closed around the knife. With an exultant

cry, she turned to face her tormentors, holding the weapon before her.

„Touch me and you die,‟ she hissed. For a moment, no one moved,

everyone seemed frozen for the unexpectedness of Tanya‟s move had taken

them all unaware. Then, as if in a dream, Tanya heard footsteps running

down the steps outside, and Nicholas burst into the room. He took the

situation in at a glance and leapt towards the two Streltsy guards. They stood

no chance against the giant. He spitted one with his sword, then as the other



Tanya

206

sprang towards him, sidestepped quickly and felled him with a crashing blow

of his fist, probably breaking his neck in the process.

Meanwhile, Tanya was stabbing out at Father Stevanov and the nuns,

who were crowding around her, obviously hoping to overpower her and

subdue Nicholas by threatening her life. Two of the nuns leapt towards her,

clawing for her eyes, and without hesitation, Tanya plunged the knife into the

breast of the foremost. A spurt of blood splashed out over the front of her

gown, and the knife was wrenched from her hand as the women fell. With a

screech the second nun launched herself at Tanya, knocking her backwards

and falling on top of her. The woman‟s fingers were raking for Tanya‟s eyes,

and she couldn‟t shake her off; then suddenly, the nun‟s grip relaxed, and

she gave a grunt. Pushing the inert body from her, Tanya leapt to her feet,

then smiled approvingly at the urchin who was brandishing the chalice with

which he had hit the woman over the head.

Tanya stood for a moment catching her breath, then glanced quickly

round the room. There were only a few nuns left in sight, and they fled in

terror as Nicholas advanced towards them. Tanya flew across the room and

threw herself into Nicholas‟s arms.

„Thank God, thank God. I thought I was finished then.‟

„You‟re a brave girl,‟ he said approvingly. „And at the moment look a

proper harridan. Who‟s the lad?‟

„Do you know, I don‟t even know his name. He was imprisoned here

with me and was to be killed also.‟

„We must get out of here immediately. Pull out the knife, we may have

need of it yet.‟



Tanya

207

With a grimace of distaste, Tanya did so and stuck it in her belt.

Suddenly she realised that Father Stevano v had disappeared.

„Stevanov has escaped,‟ she cried. „He may have gone for help. That is

the one who should be killed, he is evil, evil. But, Nicholas, we cannot leave

here without Veda. They took her away during the night, we just can‟t leave

her here. I have a feeling she may be imprisoned down here somewhere.

Keep a guard on the door, and I will check through that doorway. Child, you

stay with Nicholas.‟

She hurried across the room and found that the door at the far side

opened easily. She stepped through and looked around the room. It was

quite empty apart from bits and pieces strewn around and was obviously

used as a storeroom. She was just about to leave when a groan froze her to

the spot. She crossed the dimly lit room, and pulling aside a curtain, she

found another door; this one was bolted but not locked, and it swung open

easily. Stepping through into the room, Tanya strained her eyes against the

gloom, then a gasp of sheer horror escaped her, and she had to lean against

the wall to steady herself. A pathetic little bundle was lying huddled on the

floor, and from the state of undress, it was obvious it had once been a

woman. It did not resemble anything much now, however. The face was a

bloody pulp, and both eyes had been put out. The limbs were bent and

twisted, and terrible furrows and weals ran the length of the body. Numbly,

Tanya crossed the room and knelt down beside the still form. A glance at the

bloodstained flaxen plaits was enough to confirm her worst suspicions. It was

Veda! With a strangled sob, Tanya lifted the limp head into her lap and

began to rock backwards and forwards.



Tanya

208

„Veda, Veda, my poor little Veda. What did you ever do to hurt anyone

in all your life? Why would they do such a terrible thing? Why, oh God why

do you let such things happen?‟ Her tears fell on to the girl‟s face and

another moan escaped the racked form. The torn and bloodied lips moved.

„Mistress?‟ Tanya had to strain her ears to catch the whispered words.

„Mistress. I‟m sorry, so sorry. I didn‟t want to say those things about you, but

they made me. I couldn‟t stand it any more, I had to say what they wanted.

They were laughing, laughing.‟

„No, no sweeting, it‟s all over now. No one will hurt you ever again.

Their turn will come to pay, when they come before the blessed throne. You

have nothing to fear, an angel will take you with open arms.‟

Veda‟s hand held hers tightly for a moment, and she tried to speak

again. All that came out was a sigh, then the body in Tanya‟s arms went

limp, and the head lolled. Oblivious of everything, Tanya knelt there, the

tears pouring down her cheeks. She didn‟t even hear Nicholas come up

behind her until a hand fell on her shoulder.

„God in Heaven. What have they done to her?‟

„She is dead. God rest her soul, and may theirs burn in hell,‟ replied

Tanya, then turned to Nicholas. „Carry her out, dear friend. I cannot leave her

in this evil place.‟

Nicholas regarded her gravely. „I cannot, Tanya. We must leave now

and leave swiftly, or we will never get out of here. That pitiful body is not

Veda, she is free now, and far away. Come.‟

Unresisting, Tanya allowed herself to be led from the room, forcing

herself not to look back. She took the child‟s hand again and followed

Nicholas up the flight of steps. He led her quickly through the corridors,



Tanya

209

seeming to know the way easily. They saw no one. Soon he pushed open

the huge door, and the blessed cold night air was on their faces. He led the

way across the courtyard.

„Thank God I came,‟ he said over his shoulder. „I had a drink in the

tavern where I was staying and mentioned this place. The fear it inspired in

everyone made me think perhaps it was not such a good place to have left

you after all. I couldn‟t make up my mind what to do for the best. I couldn‟t

have slept anyway for fear for you, so thought I‟d come and check up on you.

I hammered at the door and asked for you but was told you had decided not

to stay there after all and had left. I was puzzled but sure you would not have

gone anywhere without telling me. I tried to argue, but they slammed the

hatch in my face. I prowled around, then found a side door which I managed

to break down. I had to kill a guard, then began to explore. The place

seemed deserted, then I thought I heard sounds from the foot of the steps.

The rest you know.‟ He paused breathlessly, glancing around for signs of

pursuit. „Who is this Father Stevanov?‟

„One of the most evil men I have ever met,‟ replied Tanya with a

shudder. „How much further to this door of yours? I can‟t wait to get out of

this place.‟

„Not much, further,‟ he panted. Before he could say more, there was a

sudden trample of feet behind them and, spinning round the fugitives , saw a

party of Streltsy guard, and hovering behind them, Father Stevanov.

„Run,‟ shouted Nicholas, giving Tanya a push. „Follow the wall round,

and you will come to the door. Run for your lives.‟

„But what about you?‟ cried Tanya. He gave her another push. „I will

hold them off then catch you up. Go on, do as you‟re told.‟



Tanya

210

Tanya took hold of the child‟s hand and fled, stumbling against the wall

in her anxiety not to miss the door. At last, her hand came into contact with

rough wood, and she discerned a door hanging crazily on its hinges where

Nicholas had broken his way in. She glanced over her shoulder to see if

Nicholas was coming, b ut all she could see of him was his blond head

towering over the Streltsy swarming around him. She hesitated there,

undecided what to do, but then the boy tugged at her hand and pointed, eyes

wide with fear. Now Tanya made out the figure of the tall, gaunt priest

running towards them, and she allowed herself to be pulled through the door.

Soon she was running through the cold deserted streets, blindly following the

urchin through narrow alleyways and stinking rubbish-strewn yards. Panting

for breath, they finally came to a halt in a narrow pitch-black alley, the centre

of which was full of frozen water and half-rotten garbage. He ducked through

a tiny opening in some sort of fence and pulled her through a hole covered

with a filthy rag.

„This is my home,‟ he whispered proudly. „No one else knows of this

place, and I have it all to myself except when someone stumbles on it, but no one

ever bothers me.‟

Tanya could scarcely see anything, it was so dark, and the place was

freezing cold.

„How will my friend find us here?‟ she asked, shivering.

„Pardon me, lady, but I don‟t think your friend will be finding anyone, not

as how I saw him last anyways. Never mind, things will look better in the

daylight, and I‟ll have a snoop around and then see what I can find out.‟

Tanya was too weary to take in the full import of his words; indeed, her

mind felt quite numb. He gave her a gentle push.



Tanya

211

„Go to sleep now. There‟s some covers over there in the corner. Sleep,

and in the morning, everything will seem better.‟

Unresisting, she lay down and pulled the rags over her aching body.

She dropped immediately into a heavy, dreamless sleep.

It was the cold that first awakened her. Her whole body was numb, and

she was shivering violently, although her head seemed to be on fire. She

tried to pull the few pitiful rags over her body, but they provided practically no

warmth at all. Of the child, there was no sign. It was not very long before she

realised that she was also extremely hungry, and she groaned and opened

her eyes again. She gazed around the tiny place where she lay – it could

hardly be called a room, it was more of a hole in the ground. Outside, it

seemed to be snowing, for every now and again, the dirty rag over the

entrance blew in with a gust of icy wind, and eddies of snow swirled into the

room. Tanya dragged herself up and sat huddled in the corner, trying to rub

some warmth into herself. She took in her dismal surroundings with

despairing eyes. To what depths had she sunk in such a short space of

time? Even when she had been living with Sten‟ka in the cave, life had not

been so devoid of all comfort. At least, there the air had been fresh and

clean, and the surroundings beautiful in their own way. Why, there was not

even any means of making a fire that she could see. She would freeze to

death very quickly, surely, for her body was not hardened to the rigors of a

winter here in the slums of Moscow, and she was so hungry! Perhaps even

the child had deserted her. Despair threatened to engulf her, then she heard

footsteps outside and the curtain was pushed aside to reveal the round,

unprepossessing features of her benefactor. He grinned.



Tanya

212

„Hullo there. How are you feeling this morning? I‟ve been snooping

around to see what I could find out. I went back to the convent, but the side

door we escaped through has been boarded over. I could see no signs of life

and didn‟t dare knock on the gates.‟

„I should think not,‟ answered Tanya with a shiver. „There was no sign

of Nicholas then?‟

„Nothing. To be truthful, I didn‟t think there would be. Last I saw of him,

he looked pretty outnumbered.‟

As the full import of his words sank in, Tanya gave a choked sob.

„Oh no, you‟re not saying he‟s dead. Not Nicholas, he couldn‟t be dead.

I don‟t believe you, I won‟t.‟

„There, there, lady, you‟re probably right,‟ answered the urchin hastily.

„No doubt he killed them all and escaped. I shall need to sneak out every day

and have a nose around, see if I can find out anything.‟

Feeling slightly comforted by the child‟s words, in spite of the fact that

his first surmise was almost certainly the correct one, Tanya gave a sigh and

sank back against the wall.

„I‟m so cold and hungry,‟ she complained. „I don‟t think I‟ve ever been

so cold and hungry in my life.‟

The child‟s cheerful face dropped.

„I‟m sorry.‟ He hung his head. „I guessed a fine lady like you wouldn‟t

stay here with me. You‟ll be wanting to leave of course – go to your friends.‟

At his words, a tide of colour rose in Tanya‟s cheeks.



Tanya

213

„No, no,‟ she answered hastily. „Please don‟t misunderstand. I‟m really

very grateful for your help in escaping last night and for sharing your home

with me. What is your name?‟

„Peterkin,‟ he answered. „But you will still want to leave, won‟t you?‟

Tanya‟s heart sank and she stared at him wordlessly. Where could she

go? She had no friends any more in Moscow. To her own society, she was

as good as dead, disgraced. Apart from that society, and poor dear Nicholas

and Veda, she had had no friends. And now Veda was dead and Nicholas

too, probably. For a moment, she allowed the dear image of Ivan to form in

her mind, then quickly banished it. There would be no help for her from that

quarter; he hated and despised her, probably even more so now that she

was considered to be a traitor. So, she had nowhere to go. She had no

choice for the moment but to stay here. At least, no one would ever find her.

„No, Peterkin,‟ she replied gently. „At the moment, I shall be most

pleased and grateful to accept your hospitality – and I can at least help to

make our home a little more comfortable.‟ She reached down into her belt for

her purse, then gave a gasp of horror. It was gone! It must have been lost in

the fight in the convent, probably when she had grappled with the nun.

„My purse, it‟s gone,‟ she wailed. „All my money and jewels, gone.

Whatever shall I do now?‟

„Bless you, I‟ve survived here most of my life with no money. I shall just

have to steal for one extra, that‟s all.‟

„Steal?‟ said Tanya, regarding him with a fascinated eye. „Do you really

live by stealing?‟

The urchin raised his chin.



Tanya

214

„How else do you think the likes of us manage to stay alive?‟ he asked

defiantly. „That‟s all we can do, we have no hopes of anything else.‟

„Yes, yes, of course,‟ answered Tanya hastily. „I wasn‟t criticising, I was

just thinking how clever you must be to live like that. Er, Peterkin, do you

think you could manage to find me just a little something to eat?‟

The boy laughed and flourished the tattered bundle he was clutching.

„I‟ve already seen to that,‟ he declared proudly and produced a loaf of

black bread, some nuts and fruit, and a side of bacon. „We‟ll have to make do

on the bread and fruit now, but later, I‟ll go and see old Tolov, see If I can

use his fire to cook the bacon. I shall have to give him a bit, but it‟ll be worth

it. I don‟t think you had better come just yet, you‟d do better to stay here. Old

Tolov is top man around here and has an eye for a pretty girl. You‟d probably

die of fright if you saw him anyway – he‟s pretty awful if you‟re not used to

him.‟

With these cheerful words, he thrust the food towards Tanya, who ate

avidly. Although it did not nearly satisfy her hunger, it made it bearable, and

she could see she would have to get used to eating little. She drank the

water Peterkin passed to her, for she was very thirsty, but screwed her nose

up a little for it looked decidedly murky. When she had finished, she pulled

her shawl tighter around her shoulders, tucked her feet under her to try to get

them warm, and regarded her young host questioningly.

„Well, what happens now? Can I go out and have a look around?‟

Peterkin looked worried.

„That‟s just it, you‟re so pretty, I daren‟t let the ruffians who live around

here set eyes on you, or your virtue wouldn‟t he worth a kopek.‟



Tanya

215

Tanya flushed. Such cynical words coming from the mouth of so young a

child seemed terrible, although common sense told her that to grow up in a place like

this, associating with all the scum and riff-raff of Moscow would scarcely keep a

young mind pure.

„But I can‟t stay in here for the rest of my life,‟ she protested. „I shall have to go

out sometime.‟

„Yes, yes, of course, but I must find you a suitable cloak, to cover your hair

and face up a bit. That one you have is far too grand, it would attract attention. Your

dress wil do, it‟s all torn and dirty anyway. But just give me a chance to sort things

out. You‟ll do best to stay here for a couple of days anyway.‟ On these words, with a

cheerful wave, he disappeared through the curtain, and Tanya was left to her own

devices.

Naturally, with nothing to do to take her mind off her worries, her thoughts

inevitably turned to the events of the past few days, and her heart was heavy as she

remembered the cheerful, kind Veda, and the terrible end that had been hers, and

poor Nicholas too – what had happened to him?. Then, slowly and unwillingly, her

thoughts turned at last to Erik. He had been on her mind a lot, but she had pushed

the thoughts away, not wishing to remember how they had ended up hating one

another. Her whole life seemed to have gone sour on her. Waves of self-pity

engulfed her, and the tears began to fall as she thought of all she had lost – and

worse still, of that she had never had – never would have – Ivan. At the thought of

him, she threw herself down on the hard, dirty covers and sobbed bitterly. She must

have cried herself to sleep, for the next thing she knew, she, Nicholas, and Veda

were once again inside that dreadful convent. They were walking hand in hand down

a long corridor that seemed to disappear into a haze of mist. She could vaguely

discern figures in the mist, then thought she saw Ivan‟s face smiling at her. With a



Tanya

216

glad cry, she broke away from the others and began to run towards him, but she

never seemed to be getting any nearer. She tried to call his name, then saw

a figure with his back towards her, near at hand. Crying his name, she

reached out to him, and he turned. The face that appeared before her was

not Ivan‟s, but Father Stevanov‟s. With a scream of pure terror, Tanya turned

and tried to run away, but someone was pulling her back. She glanced over

her shoulder, and saw it was Erik. He was pulling her towards him, forcing

her backwards. Suddenly she was in her old room at the palace, and Erik

was trying to subdue her whilst she struggled fiercely beneath him, as had

happened so many times towards the end. She cried out and twisted away

frantically, and then the dream was reality, and the foul, fetid breath of her

assailant was in her face as he grunted with the effort of trying to hold her

down with one hand and turn up her skirts with the other. She could not see

her attacker as it was now almost dark inside the hovel, but suddenly her

mind was clear and cool. She reached to the belt of her dress, and her

fingers closed around the hilt of the knife she had acquired at the convent.

Then she went quite limp. With a growl of triumph, the unknown loosened his

grip on her arms and straightened up a little. Tanya grasped the knife with

both hands and thrust it upward with all her strength. The man gave a

strangled cry, and she felt something warm gush over her arm then the full

weight of his body trapped her. She struggled frantically out from underneath

and staggered over to the far corner of the room. She was still crouched

there like a wounded animal at bay when Peterkin arrived, clutching a

spluttering, evil-smelling lamp in one hand, and the side of the bacon under

his arm. He almost dropped both when he saw Tanya, but his shrewd eyes

took in the situation at a glance. Tanya did not appear to have seen him



Tanya

217

come in; indeed, she seemed quite oblivious to her surroundings. Seeing

that she was in a state of shock, Peterkin forced her almost rigid body down,

examined her to make sure the blood was not her own, and then covered her

up. With a grimace of distaste, he crossed over to the body and pulled out

the knife, wiped it carefully, and hid it under some rags in the corner. Leaning

over the inert form, he held his lamp high and turned the body over. His

eyebrows flew up.

„Ah, so,‟ he muttered under his breath and shot a swift look in Tanya‟s

direction. She had not moved a muscle since he left her. He shook his head

slowly.

„So it‟s old Tolov‟s chief crony she‟s put away, is it? We‟ll both be in for

it if anyone saw him come in here. Still, that‟s unlikely in this black corner. I

wonder how he knew a woman was in here. Perhaps it was sheer chance,

I‟m sure no one saw us last night. Well, all the worse for him, dirty old devil. I

must get him out of here quickly though.‟

Grunting and gasping with the effort, he pulled the body out through

the opening and managed to drag it to the far end of the alley. As it was quite

dark by now, he left it huddled in the corner where it would not be discovered

until daylight. Then he hurried back to his room and knelt down beside

Tanya. Her eyes were still open and s taring, but he was sure she was quite

unaware of his presence. She remained that way for almost a week,

although the boy managed to feed her. She opened her mouth and

swallowed the food like a baby, but nevertheless grew dreadfully thin and

pale, and Peterkin was beginning to think her mind was completely gone.

Then one morning, she gave a sigh, curled up, and seemed to drop into a



Tanya

218

deep natural sleep. She slept through the day, then as evening approached ,

she stretched, yawned, and sat up, looking around her with a puzzled frown.

„Where am I?‟ she exclaimed, then caught sight of Peterkin‟s anxious

face. „Why yes, of course, little Peterkin. I‟m staying with you, aren‟t I? Just

for a while. I‟m very hungry.‟

Peterkin smiled with relief and offered her some fr uit, which she quickly

ate. As she washed the food down with the usual brackish water, she

remembered all the terrible things that had happened, how she had lost

Veda and Nicholas, her home, and everything she had had in life. She also

vaguely remembered a horrible nightmare she had had, whilst sleeping, but

banished it from her mind. She felt better and stronger, almost cleansed

somehow, and felt some of her old fighting spirit returning to her. She smiled

brightly at Peterkin.

„I feel a lot stronger now,‟ she told the boy reassuringly. „Life may not

be what the Princess Mensherikovsky is used to, but at least, I am alive.‟

„Who did you say?‟ asked Peterkin sharply, sitting up. „What name did

you say?‟

„Yes, you have a real, live princess as a guest,‟ laughed Tanya.

„Yes, yes, but what name did you say?‟ cried Peterkin impatiently.

Tanya frowned. „Mensherikovsky. Why?‟

„You‟re not a relation of Prince Erik Mensherikovsky by any chance,

are you?‟

Tanya frowned. „Well, yes, I am. Why?‟

Peterkin began to look sorry that he had opened the subject. „Oh, no

reason. I just wondered, that‟s all.‟



Tanya

219

„What do you mean, just wondered? Why should the name

Mensherikovsky mean anything to you? Why did you jump like that, and now

you are looking decidedly guilty. Come on, Peterkin, tell me the truth. What

about Erik?‟

„Erik.‟ He looked startled. „Was he a close relative?‟

„Yes, he‟s my husband,‟ admitted Tanya. „That‟s what I‟m doing in this

mess. He got arrested for treason and . . .‟ she broke off. „That‟s it, isn‟t it,

Peterkin? You‟ve heard something about him. Tell me immediately, I want to

know the truth.‟

The boy looked at her with pity in his eyes.

„Do you love him very much?‟ he asked softly.

„No,‟ answered Tanya shortly. „As a matter of fact, I never did. It was a

marriage I was forced into by circumstance.‟

Peterkin looked relieved. „Thank goodness for that. I suppose that

doesn‟t make it quite so bad then. He‟s to be executed tomorrow by order of

the Tsar. For treason. It‟s said that the Tsar will allow him to be beheaded

instead of hung, because of his noble blood.‟

Tanya gave a gasp and shrank back against the wall. So Erik was to

die! Poor, tragic Erik, whom life had treated so harshly, was now to die

because of his insatiable desire for power. Indeed, she was sure that he had

been half mad towards the end of their days together, whether through lust

for power and more wealth or lust for her she was unable to decide. As she

remembered what he had been like in the early days of their disastrous

marriage, a wave of sorrow and regret swept over her, and she bowed her

head. Poor, foolish Erik, he had had so much, and now had thrown it all

away. Perhaps if she had tried to talk him out of his part in the plot to



Tanya

220

overthrow the Tsar, things would have been different; but even as she

thought this, deep inside, she knew there was nothing she could have done.

She remembered how overbearing and arrogant he had been, how he had

not allowed her any say in anything in their life together, and her heart

hardened a little. No, nothing could have changed how he was. He had been

set on the course he had chosen long before she met him and would have

remained on that course despite everything. The thought of the power of

ruling over others, perhaps even through the Tsar‟s weak son had led him

enticingly to his death. She raised her head and smiled wearily at Peterkin.

„Do you know any details?‟ she asked softly. „Don‟t be afraid to tell me,

right now I feel as if nothing can ever hurt me as badly again as this past

illness. I want to know everything you have heard.‟

Peterkin settled back into the corner and crossed his arms.

„Well, there are all sorts of rumours flying around. Everyone knows that

when the Tsar found out about the plot, he fell into a terrible rage. It seems

your husband had been plotting with the Tsarina to overthrow him, but Peter

will not allow Alexis to have been involved and will not punish his son at all.

His wife he leaves in exile. He is afraid to touch her, I think.‟

„How did he find out about the plot?‟ asked Tanya.

Peterkin shrugged. „No one knows,‟ he replied. It‟s not general

knowledge, Prince Romodanovsky‟s spies, I suppose. But rumour has it that

the Prince was at the palace when the Tsar was informed and was arrested

immediately, and all his great wealth confiscated. It appears that someone

also mentioned your name, and you too are supposed to be under arrest,

you were lucky to escape. The officer the Tsar has put in charge of the

search for you has far exceeded his duties. He‟s been looking for you



Tanya

221

everywhere. I‟ve seen him myself, riding his horse through these slums,

asking people for information. It‟s a good thing you‟ve been hidden away

here for over a week, and nobody has seen you. Most of the people round

here would sell their own grandmothers for a few kopeks.

„Over a week, you say?‟ interrupted Tanya sharply. „That‟s impossible, I

only came here the other day.‟

„You‟ve been very ill,‟ replied Peterkin guardedly. „But you‟re better

now, and believe me, you have been here over a week.‟

Tanya shook her head slowly. „No wonder I feel so weak. What a

strange thing. You say I‟m quite better now?‟

„Aye, but you‟d best stay hidden until Dostoyevskiy removes his men

from the area.‟

Tanya‟s head jerked up, and she stared at Peterkin almost painfully,

her hand creeping up to her throat.

„What name did you say?‟ she asked hoarsely, hoping she had heard

wrongly.

„Dostoyevskiy,‟ repeated Peterkin. „Count Dostoyevskiy. Why, what‟s

the matter? Why do you look so strange?‟

Tanya didn‟t answer, but she seemed to shrink a little and made a

pathetic attempt at a smile. So, the ultimate irony. The man she would have

given her life for, the one man who held all her thoughts, all her dreams, was

searching for her, combing the streets. But not for the wish to find her to hold

her in his arms as she had so often dreamt, not to look at her with that tender

light in his eyes as he had done that far off night at the ball, before his look

had turned to scorn. No, he wanted to find her to throw her into prison,

perhaps even to the death he obviously believed she so richly deserved. He



Tanya

222

would never believe that she had had no part in the plot, indeed, had had no

choice but to remain silent. He would not believe that she had been forced

into her marriage against her will; he wanted nothing better than to hate and

despise her. So be it; she must learn to live without him, must banish him

from her thoughts, from her heart. Even as she made the resolution, Tanya

knew it was impossible.

Suddenly, she felt the urge to tell her story, tell it all, and get it out of

her system. She began to talk, haltingly at first, then, as she grew swept

away by her memories, she poured out all her heart, all her thoughts,

everything that had happened to her in her strife -torn life. She did not really

talk to Peterkin, rather to herself, or to the shade of Ivan, always hovering

before her. She talked and talked until she came to the part where she had

met Peterkin and, at the mention of his name, seemed to return to her present

surroundings and blinked, rubbing her hand tiredly across her eyes. She

laughed shakily.

„Oh, I‟m sorry, Peterkin, I must have been boring you stiff. I don‟t know

what came over me to talk like that – especially to a child.‟ She blushed as

she remembered some of the more intimate details that she had reminisced

over.

Peterkin shook his head wonderingly.

„You haven‟t bored me in the least. I‟ve never heard a more wonderful or

interesting story. Anyway, I‟m not a child, I‟m about fifteen you know, so old

Tolov says. I know I don‟t look it, because I‟m so small, but I‟ll grow – I‟m

almost a man. I shall look after you from now on, no one will ever find you, I

promise.‟

Tanya looked at the boy affectionately.



Tanya

223

„Of course, you are very brave and strong, little Peterkin, and I‟m very

grateful to you for everything, really I am. But I can‟t stay here for ever you know.‟

Peterkin‟s face dropped.

„No, of course not,‟ he agreed dismaly, „but you will stay for a little while,

won‟t you? You did promise.‟

„Yes, yes, for a little while then. But I interrupted you, didn‟t I? You didn‟t

finish after you got to . . .‟ her voice faltered a little, and he took her up

quickly.

„The execution is to take place tomorrow, publicly, in the square

outside the Kremlin.‟

„Tomorrow?‟ whispered Tanya. „So soon!‟ Once again, she felt a

tremendous surge of regret. „Publicly, you say? Then I must go. It is the least I

can do after all.‟

„That‟s impossible,‟ burst out Peterkin. „Whatever do you want to do that

for? You can‟t, it‟s too dangerous.‟

„I‟m going, and that‟s that,‟ replied Tanya firmly. „You can come with me

if you like, or you can stay here, it‟s up to you. You don‟t understand, do you? I

don‟t understand myself really, I only know I have to go, I just have to.‟

Peterkin shrugged resignedly.

„Very well, I‟ll go with you, you can‟t go alone, that‟s for sure. But I think

you‟re wrong. You‟re not strong enough for an ordeal like that.‟

„I‟m stronger than I look, Peterkin, believe me. And – thank you, thank

you for everything.‟

That night, Tanya found it hard to sleep, her mind a whirl of thoughts

and memories. She wondered whether she should have gone to the Kremlin,

tried to see Erik one last time, but she knew it would be impossible, and



Tanya

224

anyway, could not face the thought of seeing him in that place, perhaps even

broken in body and spirit. A small, insistent voice whispered inside her that if

it was Ivan incarcerated within those grim walls, nothing on earth would have

stopped her going to him, but she pushed the thought away, ashamed. She

was awake with the dawn, pacing up and down the small, dark room

impatiently.

The execution was to take place at noon, and the hours dragged by

with agonising slowness. They had eaten a good breakfast of black bread,

meat, and cheese, washed down with a bottle of wine that Peterkin had

acquired the day before. Although it was cheap and of poor quality, it had

warmed her and given her a feeling of strength for the coming ordeal. She

braided up her hair, now lank and lustreless and covered it with an old black

shawl that Peterkin had managed to find somewhere. As they stepped out

into the evil-smelling alley, the very skies seemed to reflect her mood, for the

clouds were low and black, and an icy wind made her shiver and pull her

shawl more tightly around her shoulders. She followed Peterkin as he led her

through the maze of filthy, stinking streets, picking their way through what

seemed to Tanya to be the very dregs of humanity. She had never dreamed

that such places could exist, that people could live in such squalor and

poverty. At last, however, they found themselves in the better part of

Moscow, the Belygorod, or White Town, which was enclosed by a white

stone wall. Here there were noble‟s and merchant‟s houses and many

churches and shops. This, Peterkin informed her, was where the best

pickings were to be had. Soon they found themselves part of a great crowd,

all laughing and jostling, talking excitedly of the coming execution, and the

general spirit seemed to be a holiday one. Peterkin grimaced in disgust.



Tanya

225

„There‟s nothing this lot like better than an execution,‟ he whispered

disdainfully. Tanya shuddered, and took his hand, to save being separated

from him by the crush of people.

At last, they reached the inner core of the city, and Execution Square.

Peterkin, on Tanya‟s insistence, forced a way through the crowd until they

were standing right at the edge. Tanya averted her eyes from the bodies

twisted in death on the wheels which stood around the scaffold. These were

the men who had, perhaps, betrayed Erik, but who could blame them if they

had suffered like that?

She knew that she was running a grave risk in coming here, for it was

well known that being a woman gave no immunity to torture or death. She

remembered the stories she had heard of the last Streltsy Rebellion, when

they had tried to put Peter‟s half-sister Sofia on the throne. It was said that

fourteen torture chambers had been used to extract information, and 800 had

died by hanging, or the wheel, and a few by the comparative mercy of the

axe. Many women, most of them nuns, had also been tortured horribly. She

gave an inward shudder and could only be thankful that Erik was to die by

the axe – quick and clean.

It was almost noon, and slowly the roar of the crowd was hushed as the

distant roll of drums informed the spectators that the prisoner was

approaching. Tanya‟s heart began to thump, and she felt a little sick.

Peterkin cast an anxious look at her.

„There‟s still time to leave,‟ he whispered urgently, but she shook her

head resolutely, her eyes fixed in front of her. Gradually the sound of the

drums drew nearer, and soon the impressive figures of the Tsar‟s own

bodyguard, resplendent in strawberry red jackets of velvet edged with black



Tanya

226

sable came marching by. The long line came to a halt, and the officer in

charge called out a sha rp order. The ranks parted, and now the pathetic

figure of the prisoner could be seen. Erik‟s hair and beard were unkempt and

shaggy, and his garments in filthy rags. He had obviously been tortured, for

one shoulder was twisted and misshapen, and he was limping badly, but he

still managed to stand upright, and he held his head high, staring

unflinchingly in front of him. Tanya felt a surge of pride that he could still be a

man, even when facing death. A threatening rumble arose from the crowd on

seeing the condemned man, for there were many who rejoiced to see so rich

and powerful a man humbled. Yet he had retained all his arrogance, and this

the rabble obviously did not like.

There were many officers and nobles on horseback, and these did a

solemn ride past, each naming the man a traitor. Finally, the two ranks fell

back and left Mensherikovsky standing alone. He was seen to cross himself

and utter a short prayer, bending his knee to the priest for absolution, then

he mounted the steps of the scaffold that loomed high, throwing a long

shadow over where Tanya stood. For a moment, his cold gaze swept

indifferently over the crowd, then suddenly he stiffened, as his eyes fell on

the figure swaying at the edge of the mob. For a moment, their eyes met,

then he threw back his head and laughed aloud. A ripple ran through the

crowd, and it fell back, obviously afraid at the sight of a man laughing in the

face of death. Thus, Tanya was standing alone, a figure apart. Abruptly,

Erik‟s laughter stopped, and he held out his arms to her for a moment, then

they dropped to his sides. Suddenly, he threw his head back and cried aloud,

just one word, that rang around the square, seeming to carry in it all the



Tanya

227

hopeless longing, all the wishes for the might have been. As the echoes of

her name died, he turned and knelt, and the executioner‟s axe fell.

The crowd surged forward again, and Tanya was pushed with them.

Tears were blinding her, for the unexpectedness of that last, despairing cry

had pierced her to the heart. She stumbled, and the shawl slipped back from

her hair, which cascaded down her back as she fell to her knees. She raised

her eyes and, through the mist of tears, saw a figure on horseback staring at

her fixedly, and as her vision cleared , she was horrified to see it was Ivan,

forcing his horse through the crowd to reach her. He must have been there

all the time, but she had scarcely taken her eyes from Erik since he had first

appeared. With a cry, she looked round desperately for Peterkin and found

his hand in hers. He too had seen the Count, and he pulled her to her feet

and began to move as quickly as he could through the dense mass of

humanity, pulling Tanya along behind him. Neither dared to look behind, and

it was with a gasp of relief that they found themselves outside the worst of

the crowd and running down the street. All too soon, Tanya heard the sound

of horses‟ hooves behind them and glanced fearfully over her shoulder. It

was Ivan, riding so fast he would soon be upon them. She pushed Peterkin

away from her.

„Run,‟ she ordered fiercely. „Don‟t dare argue, just run. I will find you

again if I get away.‟ She pushed him again and reluctantly the boy began to

run on ahead, unconsciously obeying the imperious note in her voice. Then,

raising her chin defiantly and holding her head proudly, Tanya turned to face

the man who meant more to her than life itself, who would now probably

have her arrested and perhaps put to death.



Tanya

228





Chapter 8


Peterkin ran frantically to the end of the street, then darted into a doorway.

He craned his neck to see what had happened to Tanya, but already the

press of people had hidden them from view. He stared wildly around,

wondering what he could do. He was sensible enough to realise that he

could not help Tanya by going back to her now, but what else could he do?

She was probably even now being dragged away to prison, and what could

one boy do against all the might of the Tsar? He blinked back the tears and

dashed a grubby hand angrily across his eyes. He must get help from

somewhere, somehow. He sent a fervent prayer up to the Virgin, crossing

himself, and wishing he had led a more exemplary life, for she would surely

have nothing to do with a thief. He stared blindly in front of him, then

stiffened suddenly in disbelief. His gaze was riveted on a tall fair head,

towering above the rest of the crowd around him. Sending up a soundless

prayer of thanks for this miracle, he darted forward, shouting.

„Nicholas, Nicholas, it is you, it is. Stop please, it‟s me, Peterkin.‟ He

grabbed hold of the giant‟s arm, shaking him. For a moment, Nicholas looked

down at him blankly, then his gaze cleared.

„Peterkin, of course. Thank God. Where is Tanya? Take me to her at

once. I came because I heard of the execution and thought I might find her in

the crowd. I have been half out of my mind with worry since I managed to

escape from the convent.‟

Haltingly, Peterkin told the big man of the events of the last few days,

casting anxious glances at his face to see how he was taking the news.



Tanya

229

Nicholas‟s shoulders bowed in despair, then he pulled the lad, almost

whisking him off his feet.

„Show me where,‟ he demanded curtly. Peterkin led him to the end of

the street, but by then, there was no sign of either Tanya or Dostoyevskiy.

Nicholas looked around him hopelessly, but Peterkin began to question

some of the crowd still loitering nearby and was lucky enough to find

someone who had witnessed the event. The man told him that the Count and

the lady had had what looked like a violent quarrel, then she had left with him

quietly, in the direction of the Kremlin.

Nicholas and Peterkin stared at one another in dismay. What could

they do now? If Tanya had been taken to the dungeons underneath that

fortress, what possible hope could they have of ever getting her out?

„Well, we can‟t do anything today, that‟s for sure,‟ said Peterkin.

„Perhaps we had better go back to my place and work out some sort of plan.

I knew I should never have let her come to this part of town, but she wouldn‟t

listen to me.‟

„It‟s not your fault,‟ replied Nicholas kindly. „When she gets a bee in her

bonnet, she won‟t listen to anyone. You are right, we must work out some

sort of plan. Perhaps tomorrow you could go to the Kremlin, get inside

somehow, and see if you can find out anything about her. You would be far

less conspicuous than me. Come on.‟

Despondently, they walked back through the winding streets until they

reached Peterkin‟s home. Once there, Nicholas told of the piece of luck that

had enabled him to escape from such overwhelming odds back at the

convent. He had already killed several of the Streltsy but was rapidly being

overcome when help arrived in the form of two Kremlin guards passing by



Tanya

230

the open door through which Tanya and Peterkin had fled. Nicholas had

managed to fight his way towards the door and yelled for help. The guards

had recognised the uniform of the hated Streltsy and, without further ado,

had flung themselves into the fray. With the aid of his two new friends, the

Streltsy were rapidly despatched; unfortunately, of the evil Father Stevanov,

there was no sign, and although they had searched the convent thoroughly,

he seemed to have disappeared into thin air.

On Nicholas giving them an edited version of what had happened there

that night, omitting any mention of Tanya of course, the soldiers had crossed

themselves and announced their intention of ridding the neighbourhood of

such a scab in its midst. They had promised to try to inform the Tsar of what

had been going on, and he would undoubtedly ensure that the convent would

never again be used for such unholy practices. Nicholas had thanked his

new friends and then tried to follow Tanya‟s trail. Needless to say, he had

had no luck and had come to Prince Mensherikovsky‟s execution in the hope

that Tanya would be there. That she had been and that he had been unable

to spirit her away to safety weighed heavily on his spirits.

For the rest of the day, and half way through the night, they wrestled

with the problem of rescuing Tanya but had to reject most of the wild ideas

forthcoming. Feeling quite worn out with watching Nicholas pacing up and

down, running his fingers through his hair until it stood on end, Peterkin

finally suggested that the best idea would be for him to go to the Kremlin the

following day, on the off-chance that he might be able to pick up some news

there. Having decided to pursue this course of action, they tried to get some

sleep, although with indifferent success on either part.



Tanya

231

However, bright and early next morning, a rather bleary-eyed Peterkin

set off towards the Kremlin, accompanied by Nicholas as far as the outskirts.

They had decided it would be far safer for Peterkin to go inside, as no one

would take any notice of a small, ragged urchin. Abjuring Peterkin to be

careful, Nicholas disappeared inside a tavern, and the boy set off alone

towards the forbidding gates of the Kremlin. He had no difficulty getting into

the outer courtyard, for all sorts of people, rich and poor, were milling about

the gates. Seeing a soldier lounging against the wall, more or less alone,

Peterkin sidled over towards him and began to chat about the execution the

day before, saying what a good thing it had been to see one so rich and

proud humbled. The soldier glanced cursorily at him and told him to clear off

in no uncertain terms. Peterkin the n pulled out the bottle of wine he had

secreted underneath his jerkin and, after taking a swig, offered it to the

soldier. The man, with a quick glance round, grabbed the bottle and drank

deeply, wiping his mouth and sighing.

„Thanks. I could just do with that. I‟ve been up all night standing guard

and am just waiting to be dismissed. That‟s good wine you have there.‟

„Have some more,‟ offered Peterkin, and the soldier complied, very

nearly draining the bottle, the wine spilling down the front of his tunic.

„Who have you been guarding?‟ asked Peterkin in a casual voice.

„Oh, nobody very special. I wanted to get on the guard for that red-

headed piece they brought in last night. Now that would have been a bit of

luck, especially if you could get into the room. Not that there would be much

chance of that though,‟ he added regretfully, and belched. „Some lady or

other she‟s supposed to be, although you‟d never think so from the way she



Tanya

232

was dressed. But a good looker – whew!‟ He scowled suddenly. „What‟s it to

you anyway?‟

„Nothing,‟ replied Peterkin, shrugging. „Just passing the time of day. Go

on about this fancy piece then. Don‟t see many of them around these days.‟

He sniggered and dug the man in the ribs. „Perhaps, with a strapping man

like yourself, she wouldn‟t have been quite so much the lady, eh? What‟s she

supposed to have done?‟

The soldier scratched his head. „Treason, so I‟ve heard, although I

don‟t really know for sure. One thing I do know, though, whoever wants her

out of the way wants it fast, because I‟ve heard tell they‟re taking her before

the Tsar today, and she‟s to be sentenced straight away. And that‟ll mean

death!‟ He picked at his teeth and spat reflectively.

Peterkin went pale and stared in horror at the man. At first, his spirits

had risen at his luck in actually finding someone who knew something about

Tanya‟s fate, but now he was plunged into despair. So soon! Obviously

Dostoyevskiy must have taken one of his rare dislikes to Tanya – come to

think of it, she had looked pretty queer when he‟d mentioned his name.

Perhaps, there was some old hate between them, and now he was wasting

no time getting her out of the way.

The soldier looked at him suspiciously.

„What are you looking so horror struck about?‟ he asked. „And what are

you doing poking your nose around anyway? Who are you?‟

Peterkin wasted no time in explanations but darted quickly away, and,

ignoring the soldier‟s shout, was soon lost amongst the crowd. He made his

way back to the tavern as quickly as he could and was soon recounting his

conversation to Nicholas. Nicholas looked grave and shook his head.



Tanya

233

„It‟s bad,‟ he said heavily and sank his head into his hands. „They are

obviously rushing this thing through. We haven‟t much time, we must think of

something.‟ He raised a haggard face and stared unseeingly at Peterkin.

„Once she‟s sentenced, there‟ll be nobody allowed to see her but the priest.‟

They stared at each other in silence, then suddenly, Peterkin started

up. „What did you just say?‟ he asked quickly.

Nicholas looked surprised. „Nothing, did I?‟

„Something about a priest.‟

„Oh yes, well, they‟ll have to let her have one, won‟t they? The

condemned are always allowed a priest. So what?‟

„Well, if we could find out when she is to be . . . well, you know,

executed, the priest usually goes an hour or so before. What if we could take

his place?‟

Nicholas stared at him with mingled hope and respect.

„Do you think we could do it, though?‟ he asked doubtfully. „There

would be so many pitfalls. And anyway, only one of us could go. What would

we do when we got there?‟

„Look, just stop making objections and listen a moment. If you wore a

priest‟s robe, and I went with you as your assistant, they might swallow it,

then Tanya could change clothes with me and go out with you. If the guards

are all as stupid as that soldier I questioned today, we might just pull it off.

It‟s worth a try, surely? Can you think of a better plan?‟

Nicholas shook his head gloomily. „No, I‟m not much of a hand at

planning this sort of thing. Give me the action, and I‟ll do just fine. What do

you suggest then?‟



Tanya

234

„It will take a lot of working out,‟ replied Peterkin. „We‟ll have to find out

when she‟s been sentenced, which priest is going to see her, and how to

keep him out of the way – there‟s too many ifs in it for my liking. I think the

best thing to do would be to go back to my place and ask around if anyone

has any contacts inside the Kremlin. They‟re an evil lot, there‟s sure to be

someone. If we can get some inside information, it will make things a whole

lot easier.‟

On Nicholas‟s agreement, they made their way back through the

narrow twisting streets and alleyways to Peterkin‟s dingy room. Then leaving

Nicholas, who was eating ravenously of his small store of food, the boy

slipped off to see Old Tolov, thinking that if anyone could help in their

predicament, it would be that wily old villain.

He was back within the hour, with good news. Old Tolov had a brother-

in-law whose cousin was a guard in the Kremlin, and he had promised to see

what he could do – for a price. At first, he had shown an unwonted interest in

what Peterkin had to do with the Princess Mensherikovsky but had accepted

that he was acting as an agent for someone else and that that person would

surely reward Tolov well for any information he could give. Peterkin shrugged

aside Nicholas‟s expostulation that he had no money at all and said he could

easily pick a pocket. Nicholas looked at him with renewed respect, revising

his earlier opinion that Peterkin was only a child to be discounted.

Although they could do nothing until they heard from Tolov, neither

could bear to sit around doing nothing, for thoughts of Tanya in all sorts of

terrible situations would immediately drift through their minds. After half an

hour of watching Nicholas stride up and down, stooping his great height to

avoid hitting his head on the low roof, Peterkin suggested they walk to the



Tanya

235

Kremlin again and hang around there in the hope of hearing something of

interest. Nicholas readily agreed, and they set off through the chilly evening

air, shivering as the bitter wind scattered a few snowflakes, their breath

clouding before them. There were very few people about, and they were

unable to learn anything new, but they had a mug of ale in a crowded tavern,

and Peterkin was able to put the jo urney to good use by picking a well-lined

pocket. They then bought a drink of hot mulled wine to warm them and took

hasty leave of the place before their unknown benefactor became aware of

his loss.

Neither of them slept well that night either, and they fe lt unrefreshed

and stale when the wintry dawn brought a hint of light into the Stygian

darkness of the room. They ate the last of the food, Nicholas‟s great appetite

of the day before having depleted their store considerably. Leaving the giant

to his pacing, Peterkin went off to replenish the larder, knowing it was too

early for Tolov to have learnt anything yet.

Midday found them hanging around the inevitable crowds in the

Kremlin courtyard, but they had no luck and had to run for it when the guard

Peterkin had questioned the day before shouted at them threateningly. They

dared not risk getting caught, as then Tanya‟s last hope would be gone. They

spent most of the day wandering round miserably, envisaging Tanya‟s fate.

Towards evening, however, a small urc hin darted up to say Tolov wanted to

see them, and they set off at once, hope springing in their hearts.

Tolov greeted them and offered hot wine to warm them, which they

drank gratefully, and the old man looked curiously at Nicholas, although he

said nothing.



Tanya

236

„Well,‟ asked Nicholas impatiently. „What have you learned, quickly

man.‟

Tolov scowled, and Peterkin nudged Nicholas warningly, for the old

thief was used to people crawling and whining around him and obviously

didn‟t like his tone of voice.

„Show me the colour of your money,‟ he grated „and then perhaps I‟ll

tell you what I know.‟

His scowl lifted miraculously when Peterkin produced several gold

coins purloined from their stolen purse, and he rubbed his hands together,

smiling.

„That‟s better, that‟s better. Well, never let it be said that old Tolov

doesn‟t keep a bargain. I‟ve done my work well. The wench was taken before

the Tsar today and was apparently in audience – private audience, so I

believe – for some time.‟ He sniggered and leered suggestively, and Peterkin

had to grip Nicholas‟s arm hard to stop him rising furiously.

„Yes, well, I don‟t know what exactly happened,‟ he continued, „but it

would seem that Count Dostoyevskiy influenced the Tsar a great deal, and

she was finally convicted of treason. Undoubtedly she will meet the same

fate as her husband. The date is set for four days from now, although I don‟t

know the time yet. Find me a nice fat purse, and I‟ll find out and also which

priest is attending that day, and at what time.‟

Peterkin thanked him and passed over the money. Tolov bit the gold

coin with blackened teeth and promised to let them know directly he had any

news, and they made their way home slowly, their hearts heavy with dread at

the fate which hung over Tanya‟s head. Although expected, it was



Tanya

237

nevertheless a heavy blow, and their chances of success in their mad

venture seemed terrifyingly slim.

The next two days dragged interminably. Nicholas hardly left their

room for fear of missing any news; he sat with bowed shoulders, stari ng into

space. Never had he felt so helpless, for his great strength was of no use in

this situation. Peterkin made several forays into the town, coming back with

food and drink and enough cash to pay Tolov for his information without

dipping into the few coins they had left. He had been taking far greater risks

these last few days and had narrowly escaped capture the night before when

he had broken into a linen drapers shop and stolen some clothes suitable for

him to wear in his role of clerk, with a cloak and large hood to hide his face.

The owner of the shop had awoken and almost caught him, and his furious

roars must have roused half the neighbourhood. Anyone less fleet of foot

might well have been caught, but he had decided to lay low for a while. He

had been unable to obtain a priest‟s robe, not having the faintest idea where

he would find one, but had applied to old Tolov, who had seemed to think

there was no problem and had promised to procure one for him.

They had decided to say that Peterkin had bee n given permission to

accompany the priest to take down Tanya‟s will, and any last requests, as a

special tribute to a great lady. They must just trust in the apparently inherent

stupidity of the Kremlin guards. If the plan didn‟t work, they would at least

have tried their utmost.

The long awaited summons came on the evening of the third day, the

last evening before Tanya‟s sentence was due to be carried out. As Peterkin

had had to restrain Nicholas several times from storming over to Tolov‟s den



Tanya

238

of thieves and choking the news out of him, it was with great relief that he

followed behind the ruffian who led them to their rendezvous.

On Peterkin producing the required money, Tolov handed over a

priest‟s robe which he said should hopefully fit Nicholas passably well, then

told them what he had learned. Tanya was in a dungeon underneath the

Kremlin, apparently one of the lower and more unsavoury ones. As far as he

knew, she had not been tortured, neither had she been reprieved and was

still due for execution soo n after dawn the day after tomorrow. The only

visitor she had received was Dostoyevskiy, which seemed rather peculiar as

personal attention from him was most unusual. Tolov leered again, but at the

dangerous gleam in Nicholas‟s eye, hastily continued. Father Koriev was the

priest who was to attend the following evening and was quite unbribable

according to him. As they had practically no money left by now, they passed

over that and nodded for him to continue. Tolov told them that his informant

was on guard duty tomorrow and would do his best to let them pass if they

greased his fist. Then he shrugged his shoulders and leaned back. Apart

from the fact that the priest was expected the following evening, that was all

he could do for them.

They thanked Tolov for all he had done for them, for although he was

an unsavoury rogue, nevertheless without him any plan would have been

impossible. He grinned and wished them luck, shaking his head

disparagingly as they hurried off, for privately he thought they hadn‟t a

chance.

They went straight back to their room and sat down to plan their

strategy for the following day. They decided they would find out tomorrow

where the priest lived, and what route he would take to the Kremlin, then



Tanya

239

they would lay in wait for him, overpower him, and leave him gagged and

bound in a quiet alley where he would spend an uncomfortable night, it was

true, but would undoubtedly be found by morning, when hopefully they would

be far away. They spent an unprofitable hour arguing about Peterkin being

left behind in Tanya‟s place, but as he reasonably pointed out, there was no

hope of Tanya being mistaken for Nicholas, and anyway, they would be more

likely to act leniently with a child than a grown man. Privately Peterkin had no

illusions as to his probable fate, although he showed a brave face to

Nicholas. He felt a cold knot of fear curl in his stomach at the thought, but

had it not been for Tanya, he knew he would have died in a far worse

manner in that terrible convent, and in his simple way, he knew he could do

no more than repay her in kind. As for Nicholas, he too had grave doubts as

to Peterkin‟s safety, but he knew the lad spoke the truth when he said there

was no other way, and for him, any means must be used to save Tanya from

her fate.

Having finally agreed on this point, they then decided they would follow

their original plan through, for hopefully Tolov‟s informant would let them

through, and anyone encountered after would suppose them to have been

questioned before having been allowed in. The rest would be in the lap of the

gods, they must just hope the luck would hold.

They had no trouble the next day in finding out where Father Koriev

lived, and there was only one route he could take to the Kremlin, as he lived

quite near. They found a suitable place for the ambush, then spent the rest of

the day going over and over the details of their plan.

The evening found them dressed in their respective disguises far too

early, each chafing to get on with their night‟s work. At last, it was time to



Tanya

240

leave, yet for a moment, they looked at one another uncertainly, hesitating,

then Nicholas heaved a great sigh and threw back his shoulders.

„Right,‟ he cried. „At last, the waiting is over. We go into action, now I‟ll

take charge.‟ The blood of his Viking ancestors was coursing through his

veins, and he felt a fierce joy at the thought that at last the sitting around was

over. Now he would come into his own! He was going into battle!



Tanya

241





Chapter 9


Tanya faced Ivan Dostoyevski defiantly, trying to still the rapid beating

of her heart. Her breasts rose and fell convulsively, partly from the chase, but

mostly from her close proximity to this man who held her heart, this man

who, had he known, would probably have crushed it unheedingly in his

fingers and flung it aside in contempt. He reined in his horse, holding the

snorting, nervous animal with an iron hand. He swung himself out of the

saddle and grabbed her arm with a vice-like grip that made her cry out in

pain, pulling her roughly towards him.

„So, Princess, we meet again,‟ he said mockingly, smiling a smile that

did not reach his eyes. Tanya thought she had never seen a pair of eyes that

were so hard, like tempered steel. Once, she had seen those same eyes

laughing down into her own, those lips, set now in a li ne of grim

determination, had kissed her own lightly, then passionately as she had

responded. But that, of course, had been before he had realised who she

was. She shook herself mentally, pushing the dear image to the back of her

mind. She needed all her wits about her now; she must not stand here

mooning over this man who hated her. She must treat him as an enemy, fight

with every weapon she possessed.

„You are hurting me, sir.‟ Detached, she was surprised at the coldness

of her voice, at the fact that it did not shake. „I have no intention of running

away again I assure you. I have done no wrong before God or man and am

not afraid of anything anyone can do to me. My conscience is clear.‟

For a moment, a look of reluctant admiration flashed across his eyes,

then they were cold again. He bowed insultingly and let go of her arm. Tanya



Tanya

242

forced herself not to rub the place where his fingers had surely bruised her

flesh and stood quite still, pale but calm.

„Then will Your Highness do me the honour of accompanying me to the

Kremlin. The Tsar has expressed a desire to interview you as soon as you

were detained.‟ His mocking tone made Tanya‟s fingers itch to slap his face,

but she merely inclined her head and walked silently beside him towards the

dark, towering walls of the Kremlin. She could not help wondering when, if

ever, she would leave them.

The sight of the small, crumpled body that had only a few hours ago

been the proud man who had been her husband was too vivid in her mind for

her to have any illusions about the fate which awaited her.

When they passed through the outer gates, at a word of command

from Dostoyevskiy, two soldiers fell in on either side of her, and in this

manner, she was escorted through the huge chambers she had traversed in

such different circumstances, in what seemed now to be another life. Fittingly

they were no longer magnificent and glittering with rich tapestries and

hundreds of candles, but rather looked dark and a little shabby. She was led

into a small bare room, and the two impassive soldiers stood on either side

of the door as Count Dostoyevskiy left without another glance at her. Tanya

wandered restlessly up and down the room, wondering what her fate was to

be. She felt tired and drained of all feeling, yet somehow quite detached.

Surprisingly, she felt no fear, only a dull ache in her heart at the thought of

Ivan. But even that she pushed to the back of her mind and sank listlessly

into a chair, where she sat staring vacantly ahead, her hands resting idly in

her lap. Time slipped by unheeded – it might have been minutes or hours,



Tanya

243

then there was a clash of arms as the two soldiers sprang to attention as the

Count entered the room.

„Come with me,‟ he ordered briefly and stepped aside to allow her to

pass. Two more soldiers were waiting outside, and the first two fell in behind.

She was escorted through a twisting maze of corridors and finally to the

doors of a small room, somewhat similar to the one she had just vacated,

although better furnished and with a fire burning that cast shadows over the

darkening walls. She heard the door shut behind her and turned, expecting

to see Ivan standing there. With a start, she realised she was alone, and

swung round again, straining her eyes to pierce the gloom.

„So, Princess, you grace us with your presence at last.‟ A great,

booming voice came from the depths of a huge wing chair by the fire as it

swung round to face her. There, looking at her with narrowed eyes was the

giant figure of the Tsar. This, then, was to be the audience Ivan had spoken

of. Somehow she had imagined it would be in the huge chamber where such

audiences were usually conducted. She sank into a low curtsey, her

unconscious grace belying the shabby clothes she wore.

„So, you have changed somewhat since I saw you last.‟ His eyes ran

over her in a way that made her feel distinctly uncomfortable. „You are

looking a little less dignified than when I saw you last, with your – er – late

husband. We must have more light.‟ He rose out of his chair and lit two

candles, their light making his huge shadow dance grotesquely on the wall

behind him. He stepped forward and took her hands, raising her from the

floor where she had remained, head bowed.

„Why, your hands are like ice. Come nearer to the fire, my dear.‟



Tanya

244

He led her over to the fire, and a little disconcerted by the unexpected

approach Tanya absent-mindedly rubbed her hands together and held them

out to the blaze. Her thick, tawny hair tumbling around her shoulders caught

the light from the fire and seemed to glow with a life of its own. The Tsar‟s

eyes fixed hungrily on her pure profile and slipped down to linger over the

curves of her body, outlined clearly in the simple dress.

„So,‟ his voice was thick, and sounded strange to Tanya. „We meet

again at last. I have thought of you often since we last met. No, that does it

no justice. I have dreamed of you constantly, you are always in my thoughts.

No other woman ever plagued me so, not even my Anna. She is like chaff,

and you the corn. So beautiful.‟ His voice shook, and he reached out his

hand and touched her hair almost timidly, as if he feared its fire would burn

his fingers. „See what a clumsy oaf you make of your Tsar.‟ He laughed

loudly. „I didn‟t mean to tell you all that so quickly, but you bewitch me, and

now I have told you, Tanya, Tanya.‟ This last was a groan, and taken

completely unawares, Tanya found herself pulled into his great arms, and

lifted effortlessly off her feet. He began to rain hot kisses on her face and

neck, and she felt paralysed, as much from shock as fear, but when his

fingers began tearing at the bodice of her dress she gave a choking gasp,

and quite oblivious of the fact that this man was her Tsar, that he had all

rights of life or death over her, began to hit out with all her strength,

struggling madly. Pure rage overcame all prudence, mostly because she had

been stripped of her dignity, and the detachment that had been holding her

together. One of her small fists caught him a stinging blow on the ear, and

with a grunt of surprise, he set her down, rubbing it and looking both foolish

and angry.



Tanya

245

„Well, here‟s a little fishwife,‟ he cried, then his great laugh rang out

suddenly, unexpectedly. „Took you by surprise, did I? Should have bided my

time with a great lady like you, I suppose, should have showed off all the

farradiddles of western society eh? Well, I‟ve nothing against ‟em, nothing at

all. I‟m all for being civilised – when it suits me.‟ The laugh left his face, and

he stared at her searchingly. „I want you, Tanya. I want you, so much it pains

me. No other woman can relieve that pain, though God knows I‟ve tried

enough. It‟s got to be you. I must have you, I can‟t wait any longer.‟ He took a

step towards her, arms outstretched, then stopped dead as Tanya shrank

back, unmistakable revulsion on her face.

„Don‟t come near me,‟ she hissed between clenched teeth. The

thought of this brute of a man touching her made her feel physically sick, and

it showed in her face. She had no thoughts that this was the Tsar facing her

– that he was no ordinary man to be pushed aside. The thought that to give

in to him, to enslave him, would solve all her troubles and guarantee her life

and wealth never entered her head. If she felt love for a person, or if it could

have saved the life of someone she loved, she would have unhesi tatingly

given her body, but not to save her own life. Not with Ivan perhaps standing

outside this very door, contempt in his eyes as he pictured what was

happening here. She would never give him the satisfaction of finding himself

proved right about her. He thought her cheap and a traitor. Well, if being

traitor meant not giving herself to this man, she would be a traitor – but

cheap, never. She wouldn‟t sink that low. Still backing away from the Tsar,

she bumped into a chair and pressed herself back against it.

„Do you think I would give myself to the man who has just murdered

my husband – the man who has had me brought here, yet has laid no



Tanya

246

charges against me? I am not a serving wench to be mauled around. What

do you take me for, a whore like your precious Anna Mons? I will never give

myself to you – do you hear me, never!‟

The Tsar‟s brows had drawn together during this speech, and his

cheek began to twitch alarmingly. He let out a crashing oath and grabbing

her roughly, flung her to her knees. „I am your Tsar,‟ he roared. „On your

knees, girl – how dare you speak to me in such a way! I have control over

whether you live or die. My commands are to be obeyed, do you hear me?‟

„Sir, I cannot stop you from forcibly taking me,‟ Tanya replied quietly.

„But if you do, I shall kill myself at the first opportunity I get.‟

Once before she had spoken those words, and meant them. Then, she

had been offered marriage as an alternative, and had accepted, but there

was no alternative this time. The very calmness of her words convinced the

Tsar that she meant what she said, and his shoulders slumped. He turned

away from her, the anger draining from his face. His voice was quiet now, but

more deadly somehow.

„Then, madam, you leave me no choice but to do the job for you. I take

no woman against her will, but no other shall ever have you, if I cannot. Apart

from your treasonable activities in the past, the words you have just spoken

have condemned you.‟ He rang the bell on the wall, and they waited in

silence until the door opened to admit Count Dostoyevskiy.

„Take her away,‟ the Tsar commanded, his voice expressionless. „I

leave her fate in your hands. She has been convicted of treason and is to

die. I do not wish to lay eyes on her again.‟ With these words, he turned

away, his great shoulders bowed, and the Count grasped Tanya‟s arm and

pulled her from the room. His eyes slid over her contemptuously as he took



Tanya

247

in her dishevelled appearance, as she vainly tried to hold together the torn

bodice of her gown. He spoke a few curt words to the guards, who

exchanged looks of surprise, then turned on his heel and strode away

without a backward glace. Tanya craned her neck to watch his tall figure

disappear, but she was hustled away by the guards. She was led away from

the reception area of the palace, down the corridors that gradually changed

from bright paint and tapestries to cold bare stone. They were descending

rapidly, and soon, the walls were running with moisture and icy to the touch.

On and on they went, until the guards had to light a torch, so dark had it

become. Now the doors on each side had bars and from behind them came

the moans and cries of the miserable inmates, chilling Tanya‟s blood. Finally,

they came to a door that blocked off the end of the corridor. One of the

guards took a huge bunch of keys down from a nail on the wall and, shooting

back the bolts, unlocked the door. It creaked open, and another guard

suddenly gave Tanya a violent push. Taken unawares, she landed on her

hands and knees in icy water. The door clanged shut behind her, the bolts

shot home, and the faint light of the guard‟s torch disappeared, leaving her in

total darkness. Tanya struggled up to her feet, sobbing now, all her pride and

defiance gone, her only feeling , blind panic. She stumbled ahead, arms

outstretched, but her shins hit hard stone, and she fell again. Groping, she

discovered it was a low step and struggled thankfully out of the icy water,

shivering. She pressed her back against the wall, arms outstretched. The

step was only a few feet wide, just wide enough to lay on, but at least it kept

her out of the water. She began to explore the cell, groping her way around

the walls until she reached the door. Carrying on round for what seemed an

eternity, she came to what at first she thought was another door, then she



Tanya

248

realised it must be the same one. The cell was round, and must be situated

at the foot of one of the giant towers. Cold despair clamped over her heart,

and she began to cry, hopelessly as the will to live and fight drained out of

her. Ne ver in all her life had she felt so low, so devoid of all will to live.

Cradling her head in her arms she huddled, shivering, beside the door, and

eventually fell into a doze, interspersed with vivid, frightening dreams and

pictures that flashed across her mind. Gradually, however, complete

exhaustion took over, and she sank into a deep sleep.

She was awoken rudely by a loud bang almost in her ear and jumped

violently, staring frantically round at the inky darkness until memory came

flooding back. She groped with numbed fingers and found a plate had been

pushed through a hatch in the bottom of the door, together with a bowl of icy

water. She drank the water avidly, fo r her throat was parched, then

cautiously tasted the mess in the b o wl. It appeared to be some sort of

greasy broth, with a hard lump of bread floating in it. It was almost cold and

not very pleasant to taste, but she ate it nevertheless. Her hunger somewhat

appeased, she stood up and tried to warm her cramped, frozen limbs. She

would have given anything just for a little light and warmth, for she felt half

dead with the cold. Finally, she decided to walk ten times round the cell,

going as fast as she dared, and when she got back to the door the last ti me ,

she felt a little warmer. She knew, though, that if she was le f t in here for

very long, they would not need to execute her, for she would die of the cold,

her body was unused to such abominable conditions, and her proud, fighting

spirit had deserted her. With a feeling of deep shame, she knew that if she

was suddenly transported back to the Tsar‟s presence, she might react

differently. She had said she would willingly die first, and she had meant it.



Tanya

249

She still meant it, but not this way. Not here in the dark, like a rat in a sewer,

without any vestige of dignity left. They might at least have left her that.

Like a flash in the darkness, a sudden thought occurred to her, and if

possible, she felt colder than ever. She hadn‟t realised before, but it was Ivan

who had ordered that she be incarcerated here, and not the Tsar. The Tsar

had said quite clearly that her fate was in the Count‟s hands. So this was

what he thought of her. It was a crushing blow, and she covered her face

with her hands and began to sob again, wildly, then springing to her feet,

began to pummel on the door, screaming at the top of her voice. She

continued to beat and claw at the door, until a thin trickle running down her

wrist made her stop. She became aware that her hands were bruised and

bleeding. She stood against the wall, shuddering, then slid down to her

knees in a faint.

Tanya lay where she had fallen for what might have been hours or

days, for there was no way of telling day from night here. All she wanted to

do was to die, for nothing could be worse than the cold, wet squalor of this

dungeon, or the dark despair in her heart. Suddenly, she was blinded by a

dazzling light and, for a moment, thought that she had indeed died and was

being transported she knew not where. Struggling to her feet, she shaded

her eyes, blinking at the glare. As her eyes became accustomed to the light,

however, she realised it was in fact, only the flicker of a torch, through the

grating in the door. She could hear footsteps outside in the corridor, and her

heart began to thump unevenly as hope sprang up inside her. Were they

coming for her? Please God, don‟t let them go away again and take that

blessed light with them. She stood quite still, not daring to move. There was

a jangle of keys, and the bolts were shot back on the door. She blinked in the



Tanya

250

light of the torch as the door swung open. She could not make out the

figures, they were just huge silhouettes. Then a voice spoke.

„So, Princess, you have enjoyed your stay in the Kremlin, I hope? No?

Hardly surprising, I suppose. I should never have recognised the beautiful,

glittering creature who was last in our midst, on the night of the ball. You

have changed, my dear – for the worst I am afraid.‟

Such a feeling of rage shook Tanya that she audibly ground her teeth,

and Ivan‟s mocking laugh rang out.

„Cross with me, Princess? Well, never mind, you‟ll have plenty of time

to think of a suitable revenge. Two days, in fact. After that you are to die.

Because of this, and because of your position, I am having you moved to

more, er, comfortable quarters. Follow me.‟

Wordlessly, head held high, Tanya stepped from the filthy hole, then

turned and looked back down into the well of darkness.

„Had I eighty years, instead of two days, I should never forget that

place. May God have mercy on the souls of the men who permit such

atrocities as these.‟ She turned to face her persecutors and gave a sad

smile. „Death can hold no terrors for one who has just emerged from hell.

Lead on, gentlemen.‟

No one spoke all the way to her new prison. Her words seemed to

have struck the coarse soldiers dumb, and Ivan strode alongside her,

scowling deeply, glancing down at her every now and again with a puzzled

frown. They went a different way this time and were now climbing a spiral

stairway, deeply pitted and worn by the feet of the thousands of unfortunate

souls who had trodden them. Tanya stumbled, for she was weak with cold

and hunger and would have fallen had not Ivan caught her. She pulled away



Tanya

251

proudly and continued to climb, but now her head was on fire, and her legs

felt like cotton wool. She sank to her knees again, bowing her head and

trying to regain her senses. One of the soldiers prodded her with the end of

his halberd, but Ivan pushed him aside and, bending down, lifted Tanya up

into his arms.

„Go on,‟ he said briefly to the soldiers. As if through a golden haze,

Tanya felt his beloved arms around her and could hear his heart beating as

her head rested on his shoulder. She gave a deep sigh and snuggled her

cheek against his coat. What bliss, to be held so, in his arms! She willed

death to come to her now, for here was a fitting place to die, against the

breast of her love. The fact that he obviously hated and despised her, she

completely discounted, for he had misunderstood her from the first and had

believed her to be deeply in league with the plotters who had planned to

depose the Tsar. She had not been completely blameless, of course, but had

certainly done nothing wrong enough to die for. Somehow she must make

him understand before she died.

All too soon they had reached her new cell, and Ivan was laying her

down on a rough pallet. He turned to the guards.

„Leave the keys and go,‟ he ordered.

Exchanging knowing looks, the guards obeyed, shutting the door

behind them. Tanya lay with closed eyes, hardly conscious. She felt,

strangely, gentle hands brush her hair back from her face as he began to

sponge her with warm water. Then a sharp exclamation broke from him, and

against her will, her eyes flew open.

„Who dared to do this?‟ he demanded, indicating her torn and bloody

hands. „Did someone come in and mistreat you whilst I was gone?‟



Tanya

252

„No,‟ she replied. „I did it to myself, beating on the door.‟ She turned her

head away from him, and he did not reply. He washed her hands gently in

the water, and out of the corner of her eye , she could see his expressive face

working, as if some inner battle was raging inside him. At last he spoke.

„I . . . I am sorry for the hardship I caused you.‟ The words seemed torn

from his lips, then he scowled again. „But you made me so furious, you we re

so proud and disdainful. I wanted to humble you – to make myself realise

that you are the same as other women, that you too could be brought to your

knees. Then, after you made love to the Tsar, it was the last straw.‟

Tanya pulled her hand away sharply and sat up, her cheeks flushed,

eyes snapping. „How dare you,‟ she cried. „Are you mad? I, make love to the

Tsar? You forget to whom you speak. I had to fight him off – in fact, I told him

I would die rather than submit to him. Why do you think he handed me over

to you in the way he did? I would still be with him had I given in!‟

He looked at her with derision. „You don‟t expect me to believe that,

surely? Even if what you say is true, you can hardly expect me to believe you

spoke to the Tsar in such a way. You wouldn‟t dare.‟

„Well, I did dare,‟ she flashed back at him. „And if you ever say

anything like that to me again, I‟ll . . . I‟ll . . .‟ she stuttered in fury, then seeing

him begin to laugh, swung out at him, catching him a stinging blow on the

ear. „I did that to him too,‟ she hissed. „Ask him, if you don‟t believe me. And

I‟d do it again, too. I am a wo ma n, tr ue , but I ha ve a soul as well a s a

body, and I‟ll not sell o ne to save the other.‟

‘You little vixen,’ he exclaimed. ‘I‟ve a good mind to put you over my

knee.‟



Tanya

253

Tanya sprang to her feet defiantly. ‘Just try it,’ she said through gritted

teeth.

He rose too and stood looking down at her with an unreadable

expression on his face. For a moment, they faced each other, then, like a

sleepwalker, he reached out and pulled her into his arms, his lips coming

down on hers, hard and demanding, and she felt the blood begin the drum in

her ears. The old, delicious feeling burned through her, and with an inward

sigh, she melted into him, flinging her arms round his neck, returning his kiss

with the pent-up passion of months. He held her closer and closer, until it

seemed that he would crush her, then with a groan, he flung her from him

and wiped his hand insultingly across his mouth. Tanya staggered and nearly

fell, for her head was reeling from his kiss.

„Little liar,‟ he grated. „Whore. Is that how you fought him off too? Is

that how you tried to seduce him? And to think I almost believed you?‟ He

groped for the keys and began to leave. Tanya, her heart breaking, held out

her arms to him blindly, scalding tears streaming down her face.

„No, Ivan, no,‟ she cried pitifully. „You don‟t understand.’

„I understand very well, madam Princess,‟ he sneered, then the door

slammed shut, and he was gone.

Tanya stood like a stone for several minutes, her tears falling

unheeded; then her arms dropped slowly to her sides, and she turned away

hopelessly and sat down on the bed. Her tears dried, and she felt her heart

go hard, arid cold within her. Very well, let him think ill of her. She would

never, now, let him know she loved him. She was glad that she had not

blurted out her true feelings, for to have had her love flung back in her face

would have been more than she could bear.



Tanya

254

Gradually, she began to take vague notice of her surroundings. Her

new room was quite luxurious compared to the one she had just left. There

was a large, barred window set high in the wall through which filtered hazy

sunlight; there was a rough table and chair and, heaven of heavens, a large

tub of water in the corner. Bestowing fervent blessings on whoever had

ordered it placed there, she threw caution to the winds and stripped off,

oblivious to the cold. She stepped into the water, which was only just tepid

and, shivering a little, crouched down in it, bathing herself as best she could,

for lack of soap and the inability to sit down made it rather difficult. However,

she managed very well, even rinsing through her hair, and, tearing a strip

from the hem of her petticoat, tied in back in a ponytail to keep it out of her

eyes. No one had thought to provide a towel, so, grimacing a little , she dried

herself as best she could on the petticoat, then crumpled it and threw it in the

corner. She then washed out her filthy shift, hanging it from the bars to dry,

then shook out the torn and dirty gown and shawl. She could do nothing

more to improve them. Wrapping herself thankfully in the rough but relatively

clean blanket, she lay down on the bed to stop herself from shivering. Her

mind was in a whirl from all the events of the past hour, and she felt

physically and mentally exhausted. She had meant to stay awake until her

shift was dry, but her eyelids felt like lead, and before she knew it, she was

fast asleep.

When she awoke, the room was in darkness, although it was not the

terrible darkness of the dungeon, for the moon was filtering through the

window, laying a silvery path across the floor – a path interspersed with the

black shapes of the bars. She felt cold, cramped , and very hungry, and

wondered if her shift was dry. She threw off the blanket and stretched,



Tanya

255

stepping into the shaft of moonlight. There was a stifled groan from the dark

corner of the room, and a man stood up, staring at her in awe. She gave an

involuntary cry and ran back to the bed as the man came forward into the

room. It was Ivan! Tanya was frantically trying to wrap the blanket around

herself again, but he stepped over to her and gently took it from her, his eyes

devouring her.

„I was asleep on the chair,‟ his voice was soft and wondering. „I came

in to apologise. The Tsar is roaring drunk and confided in me. You told me

the truth, and I didn‟t believe you. Perhaps you have been telling the truth all

along, and I was too blind to see. You were asleep when I came in, and I sat

down to wait, I hadn‟t the heart to wake you. I must have fallen asleep, then

something awoke me, and there you were, like an angel. How lovely you

are!‟

Tanya opened her mouth to speak, her cheeks burning, but he

checked her, putting his hand over her lips. „No, don‟t say anything. Don‟t

break the spell.‟

Then for the second time that unforgettable day, she was in his arms.

His lips were gentle, questing at first, then, as the passion rose between

them, their kisses became wilder, their breath came faster. Her head on fire,

Tanya felt the bed against the back of her knees, and then, somehow, they

were lying on it together, and at last, the great consummation of her love was

fulfilled, as she gave herself shamelessly and passionately. How different

was this union, this oneness with the man she loved, from the purely carnal

satisfaction she had known with Erik! She found it quite incomparable, as he

transported her to delights such as she had never dreamed of, and when at

last it was over, and they lay quietly clasped in one another‟s arms, she



Tanya

256

began to weep softly. Ivan raised himself up in consternation, brushing the

tears away.

„What‟s the matter?‟ he asked softly, gazing down at her with eyes

filled with wonder.

„It was so beautiful.‟ She smiled mistily through her tears and snuggled

up against his warm chest. He did not answer, and she felt a shadow pass

across her heart. He had not told her once that he loved her – had indeed

uttered no endearments at all, apart from some at the height of their

lovemaking. But then again, she had not told him of her love either. She

started to open her mouth, to tell him, when, abruptly, he unclasped her

hands, and stood up. Pulling on his clothes quickly, he looked down at her, a

strange expression of decision on his face.

„I must go. I have much to do. Don‟t be afraid, I will return.‟ On these

words, he was gone.

Tanya sat up indignantly, all her old irritation returning. Men! They

were the most exasperating creatures. Here she was, condemned to die in

two days – two days? No, surely now it must be only tomorrow left, for she

had slept a whole day through. A feeling of panic swept through her, and she

sat up shivering, suddenly feeling very cold and alone. Rebellion flared in her

blood. Die? No, she must not die, not now that she had found her love, now

when life had everything to offer. She could not die. Slowly, she got up and

dressed, then pulled the chair over to the window. Standing up on it, she

could see over the dark rooftops of Moscow. Dawn was just breaking in the

east, and somewhere a cock was crowing. Was this the last dawn she would

ever see? Fear crawled with cold fingers up her back, and jumping down

from the chair, she began to pace furiously up and down the room, vainly



Tanya

257

searching for some way to evade her fate. What had he meant, not to be

afraid, he would return? Hope sprang up in her. Could he mean to save her

somehow? But then her heart sank as she thought of his almost fanatical

loyalty to the Tsar. He would not go against him in such a serious matter as

this – anyway, he probably did not even love her a little, he had certainly

never said so. Her body, yes, perhaps he had loved that, but herself? A

different story!

When the sun was well risen, a guard brought in a large plate of

steaming stew and a cup of wine. Better fare this, than before. She fell on it

ravenously, and ate every bit. As she drank the wine, she could feel the

strength returning to her cold body and felt considerably better. She spent

the day prowling up and down her cell, or standing on her chair, peering

through the window at the buildings outside. Her view was somewhat

restricted, but at least it was outside these grim walls – there lay freedom,

but not, it would seem, for her.

The hours dragged by interminably, but as the shadows lengthened,

she began to feel more and more frightened, although determined not to

show it. Another meal was brought to her, but she had no appetite now and

merely picked at it, although she drank the wine. At last, it was dark once

again. Tanya felt a strange sort of release, for surely this waiting would be

worse than the actual happening, to die was, after all, such a little thing, over

so quickly. She wondered when they would come for her – it would not be a

public execution if it took place that night or at dawn, and somehow she did

not think it would be, for secretly, the Tsar must feel ashamed of his actions.



Tanya

258

Suddenly her heart contracted, and she backed away from the door,

fear jumping in her despite her fight to keep it down. Measured footsteps

were coming nearer and nearer, then the door was unlocked and opened.

‘The priest is here, madam. Do you want to see him?‟ It was one of the

guards who spoke, and he fitted a torch into the wall bracket as he ushered

in the huge figure of the priest. Relief flooded through Tanya.

‘Yes, yes, of course, I want to see the priest,‟ she cried, and clasping

her hands together, looked pleadingly at the large man who had entered,

followed by a funny, dark clad little man. The guard withdrew and locked the

door behind him.

„Knock on the door when you‟re finished, Father,‟ he called, and his

footsteps receded a little way down the corridor.

„Will you hear my confession, Father?‟ asked Tanya in a low voice. In

answer, the two figures threw back their hoods, fingers to lips. Tanya had to

bite her lips to stop herself screaming out with joy.

„Nicholas, Peterkin!‟ she breathed, unbelievingly. „Is it really you?‟

Peterkin grinned and skipped forward. „Yes, it‟s us, all right. Didn‟t think we

had forgotten you, did you, Princess? We‟ve come to get you out of here.‟

Nicholas frowned and shook his head. „Keep it down, rattlepate, do you

want the guards to hear?‟ He looked anxiously at Tanya. „Are you all right?

They haven‟t mistreated you, have they?‟

Tanya shook her head. „Nothing I couldn‟t handle. But what is this

about my escaping? You know that‟s impossible, I couldn‟t possibly leave

here with you – two of you came in, and only two will be allowed out.‟

Peterkin grinned again. „Two will leave – you and Nicholas. We are to

change clothes, and you will leave with Nicholas. If you keep your hood



Tanya

259

pulled well over your face, those dull clods they call guards will never know

the difference.‟

Tanya shook her head. „No, definitely not. Do you think I‟d go off and

leave you here to die in my place? No, Peterkin, I won‟t do it!‟

„Nonsense.‟ Nicholas spoke quietly and urgently. „We‟ll brook no

argument, Tanya. If it were possible, I‟d stay myself, but you‟d certainly never

pass for me. Anyway, if we run into any trouble, I‟m better equipped to

handle it. You can‟t say no, Tanya, we‟ve schemed for this ever since you

were taken, and we are risking our necks now. If you refuse to come, we‟ll

give ourselves up anyway, so you‟ll have gained nothing. Anyway, I‟ve a

rope tied round my waist, I‟ll bind and gag Peterkin, then he can say he was

overpowered, and you took his place. He can disclaim all knowledge of any

plot, and they may believe him and let him go. If not, I‟ll find another way to

save him. The main thing now is to get you out. You are condemned to

death, he is not.‟

Tanya had never heard Nicholas make such a long speech, and a lump

came into her throat. „What good, kind friends you are, what can I say? I

shall never forget your bravery, never.‟

„Well, you‟d better hurry and change clothes. Quickly now. I‟ll listen at

the door.‟

As Nicholas discreetly turned his back, Tanya and Peterkin exchanged

clothes. Peterkin looked so comical standing there in her filthy, tattered dress

that she smiled and pulled him into her arms, kissing him on the forehead.

„God keep you, Peterkin, we shall not forget you. Take care,‟ Fighting back

the tears, she turned to Nicholas. „I‟m ready.‟



Tanya

260

„Right.‟ Nicholas expertly tied up Peterkin and laid him on the bed.

They sat for a moment, and Tanya quickly told them an expurgated version

of her adventures since she was caught as they did not want to leave too

quickly, in case the guards grew suspicious. Eventually, Nicholas took her

hand, and they rose. Tanya kissed Peterkin again, tears blurring her eyes,

then Nicholas tied the gag around his mouth and covered him over with the

blanket, to give the appearance that he was sleeping. Then, taking a deep

breath, they pulled their hoods well over their faces, and Nicholas knocked

loudly on the door. The guard opened it and peered at the dark form on the

bed.

„She all right?‟ he asked gruffly, and Nicholas nodded his head.

„Yes, my son, she is sleeping now. She asked to be left alone.‟

The guard nodded and removed the smoking torch from the wall.

„Right, Father, follow me, I‟ll see you out.‟

Tanya followed Nicholas‟s huge form, trying to lose herself in his

shadow. She kept her head bent, for tears were still threatening, and her

heart was beating so loud, it seemed to drown the noise of their footsteps.

Apart from the thought of leaving Peterkin behind, there was the wrench of

leaving Ivan, who had so recently held her in his arms. Her lips and her body

were still throbbing with the ecstasy of his touch, and now she was leaving

him, surely never to see him again, for she could see no way their pat hs

would ever cross again. So enwrapped in her thoughts was she that she

hardly realised where she was going, merely following mechanically in

Nicholas‟s footsteps.

Suddenly, a draught of cold air swirled around her, and a huge door

slammed behind them. They were outside! Slowly they crossed the



Tanya

261

courtyard, Tanya fighting the desire to run as fast as she could. Nicholas

spoke in muffled tones to the guard at the outer gates, and she heard the

clink of money changing hands. Next moment, they were through the gates,

and free!



* * * *

Count Ivan Dostoyevskiy paced up and down in his chamber, his

thoughts in a whirl. Never before, in all his life, had his loyalties been so

divided. Always he had followed unquestioningly the orders of his master, the

Tsar, giving him his complete loyalty. Many times he had risked his life for

the Tsar and had never dreamed of disobeying him in any way. But now, he

knew he was going to risk his career, even his life, and go and smuggle

Tanya out of her prison cell. Whatever might happen to him he knew he

couldn‟t let her die. Lying on the bed was a page‟s uniform, which he planned

to take to Tanya. He could order the guard outside her door to leave, for

although the man would undoubtedly wonder why, he would , of course, obey

him. Then Tanya could change into the page‟s uniform, and he could lead

her out of the palace by ways known only to a chosen few. After that . . . his

thoughts were vague. They would have to leave Russia, of course. Perhaps

they should go to Paris, Tanya had said she had relatives there. But would

she even want to stay with him? He knew so little about her. Just yesterday

he had thought he hated and despised her – had thought her a traitor. He

was still not sure if she was a traitor or just caught up in the intrigue of her

husband‟s circle. Surprisingly, he didn‟t even care. Women had been few in

his busy life – he had had plenty of love affairs of course, mostly with the

foreign women who were bored with their husbands and welcomed the

handsome Count with open arms , but never, never before had he felt as he



Tanya

262

did about this strange, beautiful woman who had held him in her arms and

given him a rapture he had never before experienced. Beside the thought of

her pure profile, her large, green eyes glowing up at him, the glorious

profusion of her auburn hair tumbling around her white shoulders, his career,

his loyalty to the Tsar, even his life meant nothing if she should die.

Spurred by his recollections, he scooped up the uniform and bundled it

decisively under his cloak, then slipping a heavy purse of gold through his

belt, he took a last swift look around his room, then opened the door and

strode purposefully back along the corridors leading to Tanya‟s cell. Now that

the decision was made, he felt exhilarated and light-hearted and had to stop

himself from breaking into a run. Soon he was before her door. Nodding

brusquely a t the guard, he ordered him to open the door.

„Well, sir, the priest has but just this minute left, and she‟s sleeping

I believe. The Father said she was not to be disturbed.‟

Something like a shadow flitted across the Count‟s heart, like a

chill wind of premonition.

„Open it anyway,‟ he rapped.

The guard turned quickly and fumbled with the key in the lock.

Shooting back the bolts, he pushed the door open, and stood stiffly to

attention. Ivan pushed past him, and looked down at the still figure on the

bed.

„Tanya,‟ he cried hoarsely. For an awful moment he thought she

was dead, that she had somehow bribed someone to give her something

to put her to sleep, then the body moved, and muffled, urgent noises

came from beneath the bedclothes. With an oath, the Count pulled off the

covers and stared thunderstruck at the pale face and staring eyes of the



Tanya

263

boy on the bed. He whipped the gag away from the boy‟s face, and his

eyes narrowed as he recognised Peterkin as the boy who had been with

Tanya the day of her husband‟s execution. However, he said nothing of

this, just snapped, „Where is she? What happened here?‟

Peterkin knew he had been recognised and cursed his luck.

However, there was something here he didn‟t understand, for the Count

had not denounced him, although his eyes were hard as steel. Peterkin

decided to stick to his story anyway.

‘I came in with the priest, they told us the lady wanted to write

some letters, and the priest said he could not write. I‟m a clerk, so I came

with him. As soon as I got in the cell, they overpowered me and made me

change clothes with the lady, then they tied me up, and left.‟ As he

spoke, he was praying that Nicholas and Tanya had not been held up

and had escaped successfully. It was abominable luck that Dostoyevskiy,

of all people, should have come in so soon after they had left.

The Count nodded, and ordering the guard to stay and watch the

boy, drew his sword and ran in the direction indicated. Other guards

pointed the way, and soon he was outside the courtyard and sprinting up

the dark street. His brain was on fire with a furious jealousy such as he

had never experienced before. He had planned everything, had been

ready to whisk Tanya away with him to a new life, only to be beaten to it

by some other man who had also risked his life for her – obviously he too

loved her, and it was with him that she had gone, this unknown man. He

rejected the thought that she had not known tha t he was going to rescue

her, cursing himself for leaving so abruptly, wishing he had told her of his

almost unformed plan before he left her. He reached the end of the street



Tanya

264

and stood quite still for a moment, on his toes. The moon came out from

behind a cloud and showed the two people clasped in each other‟s arms.

A giant of a man, his blond hair glinting silver in the moonlight, and a

slight figure, hood thrown back and hair tumbling down her back. Blind

rage clouded his vision for a moment, then his brain became ice cool,

deadly, and he sprang forward, sword raised.

„Loose that whore and defend yourself,‟ he grated between

clenched teeth, his face a mask without emotion of any kind showing

upon it.

With an oath, Nicholas thrust Tanya from him hard, so that she

stumbled and almost fell, then he pulled off the priest‟s robe and drew his

sword. The two men faced one another, their blades glinting evilly in the

moonlight. Ivan threw off his cloak, and plunged in, his sword aimed for

Nicholas‟s heart. Tanya screamed, but Nicholas parried at the last

moment and sprang back. The men circled one another warily, then their

blades met with a crash.

Tanya stood pressed against the wall, deathly white, a cold fear

gnawing at her stomach. One moment she had believed herself free, and

had been sobbing her relief on Nicholas‟s broad chest, the next moment,

Ivan had appeared from nowhere, and now the two people who were

both so dear to her were trying to kill one another.

„Stop it, stop it, please,‟ she screamed, sobbing wildly. Neither man

took the slightest notice, each concentrating hard on his opponent. They

were fairly well matched, for Nicholas had had sword training whilst

working for Prince Mensherikovsky and was so strong. The Count, of

course, was the better swordsman by far, but Nicholas was surprisingly



Tanya

265

agile for his size and his great strength was wearing Ivan down, his arm

already felt numb from the blows on his sword. The fight went on, parry

and thrust, the sweat running down both men‟s faces as the pace

quickened even more, whilst Tanya followed every move, biting her lips

until she brought blood. Suddenly, Ivan slipped on the icy surface and fell

backwards. With a cry of triumph, Nicholas raised his sword to deal the

fatal blow.

Tanya flung herself forward on her knees and screamed. „No,

Nicholas, no.‟ Such was the depth of feeling, the agony throbbing in her

voice that Nicholas‟s blade faltered, and he half turned his head, his eyes

surprised. It needed only that moment for Ivan to grasp his sword and

thrust it upwards. Nicholas gave a grunt and fell to his knees, the deep

wound in his chest welling blood. Tanya stood transfixed for a moment,

then gave a terrible scream and flung herself forward across his body.

„Nicholas, Nicholas dear friend. Oh God, God what have I done?‟

Impervious to the blood now seeping through her clothes, she gathered

the giant figure in her arms, cradling his head on her lap. His eyes

opened slowly, and he stared up into her face.

„Why, Tanya? Why did you cry out like that? I had him – we were free

and away. Why did you cry out?‟

Tears squeezed out from the corners of her eyes, and, oblivious of the

silent form standing above them, she kissed him gently on the lips, and

bending her head whispered in his ear.

„I love him, Nicholas. But I love you too. I think if it had been you who

had slipped, I must have stopped him the same, and it would have been he

lying here. God forgive me, for it was I who killed you.‟



Tanya

266

„God will forgive you, Tanya, as I do.‟ The words were faint now, his

face turning white. „I know you would never willingly hurt anyone, and there is

no other way I would have died. I always knew one day I would give my life

for you, for I was not the one for you. Hold me, Tanya, Tanya.‟

He clasped her hand to his lips, and once again, a man died calling

her name.

Tanya bowed her head over his body, a roaring filling her ears. She

was dry eyed, and her heart felt like a lump of lead in her breast. She gently

eased Nicholas‟s head from her lap and rolled his priest‟s robe into a pillow,

placing it under his head. Then she crossed his hands on his breast and

covered his body with her cloak. Slowly she rose to her feet and crossed

herself, whispering a prayer for the soul of her beloved friend. Then she

raised her head and looked unflinchingly at the man who stood silently

before her. She spoke coldly.

„Are you satisfied? You have killed the one true friend I had left in the

world and foiled my escape.‟ She opened her arms wide. „Come, why don‟t

you kill me too, save the executioner his job tomorrow? Come on, strike true.‟

Ivan dropped his bloodied sword with a clatter and stepped

backwards.

„Friend? Do you expect me to believe that? Lover, don‟t you mean?‟ It

was not what he had intended to say. He longed to take her in his arms, kiss

that hard, detached look from her face, but his lips were talking cruel,

useless words, and he seemed powerless to stop them.

„Don‟t you dare to defile this good man‟s name! I swear to you he was

a good and faithful friend to me ever since I came to this accursed country

and nothing more. He was the only man I knew who gave his all for me and



Tanya

267

expected nothing in return. I loved him as a friend, as a brother, not a lover,

and he knew it. God forgive me, I gave him nothing, although now I almost

wish I had.‟ Her voice broke, and she glanced down at the still form lying at

their feet.

Ivan wiped his hand wearily across his forehead and shrugged his

shoulders. „I don‟t understand you, Tanya, and probably never will. What

then did you whisper in his ear? And why did you cry out like that?‟

Tanya‟s face burned, and she threw her head back.

„You mean you really don‟t know? There could only be one reason,

couldn‟t there? Because I love you. Yes, even after you have killed my dear

Nicholas, still I love you. I have worshipped you from the first moment I saw

you, across the ballroom that night, a lifetime ago it seems. I shall probably

go on loving you until I die. That was what I whispered to Nicholas. I didn‟t

mean to tell you, I didn‟t mean you ever to know, but now you do. Does that

answer your question?‟

He stepped forward, a light in his eyes, but before either of them could

speak, the sound of running footsteps and voices calling echoed up the

street. Ivan swung round towards the sound, and quickly Tanya seized the

sword he had dropped and brought the hilt down on the back of his head. He

dropped like a stone, and Tanya fell on her knees beside him, looking

anxiously at his pale face. He was breathing quite evenly and seemed to be

all right, and the footsteps were almost upon them. The moon had

disappeared behind a cloud, and the alley was now in darkness. She kissed

his lips, her eyes devouring the pale oval of his face, casting every line of his

features to her memory; then she leapt to her feet, and with a last, long look

at Nicholas, she turned and flitted up a nearby alleyway as silently as a



Tanya

268

ghost. On and on she ran, through a maze of narrow, dirty streets, until she

was quite lost. She was nearing the end of her strength, but still she ran.

Suddenly, she shot out of an alleyway and into a wide roadway, right under

the hooves of four horses pulling a carriage. The horses reared, and one of

their hooves caught her, giving a glancing blow, and in a blinding flash of

light, she lost consciousness.



Tanya

269





Chapter 10


Tanya‟s eyes flickered open, and she stared round her vaguely, dimly aware

that she was in some kind of vehicle, for she was swaying to and fro, and she could

hear the sound of horses‟ hooves. Her head was throbbing, and her vision dim. She

seemed to see a shadowy figure leaning over her, and she smiled, holding out her

arms.

„Nicholas? Nicholas?‟

The face withdrew a little, and with the action, memory came flooding back.

„No, no, God forgive me. Nicholas, I have killed you, Virgin Mary help me, I

have killed him.‟

She moaned and tried to sit up, but a hand held her back, and she felt a cool

cloth placed on her brow.

„Hush now, and lie still. Whatever has happened is over now. Try to sleep.‟

A kind voice spoke, and Tanya strained her eyes.

„Who are you? I can‟t see you. Don‟t leave me, no, no, don‟t take the light

away. I don‟t want to die without him. Ivan, Ivan.‟

There was a worried exclamation, and a fur was placed over her. The voice

spoke again.

„Don‟t worry, I‟m not going to leave you. The light is here, see? Try to sleep.‟

Tanya sighed and, closing her eyes, fel into a deep slumber. When she

awoke the second time, it was bright daylight, and wintry sunshine was bathing the

plush seats of the travelling coach-sleigh in which she was lying. They were still

moving, and for a moment, she wondered where she was, then all the terrible events

of the day before came back to her, and she sat up with an exclamation, pushing off

the rugs. Her head was still aching, although dully now, and she could feel a huge



Tanya

270

bruise above her eyebrow. She fingered it gingerly, grimacing, then stared around

her in bewilderment. The interior of the coach was very rich, from the velvet seats to

the ornate curtains covering the windows. She was quite alone, and the coach was

moving at a very sedate pace, quite unlike the mad way Erik used to travel. This

coach was very much like his, although lacking some of his greater extravagancies.

At the thought, panic gripped her as for the first time she wondered into whose

hands she had fallen. That they had been travelling all night seemed more than

likely, so she might now be many miles from Moscow. This thought in itself was

a relief, but it also left her completely in the power of her unknown companion.

Suppose it should be some savage Cossack, carrying her away to the outer

reaches of Muscovy – or a dissolute nobleman, secreting her away for his evil

lusts!

Truly frightened now, by her imaginings, she knelt up at the window,

and very cautiously drew back the curtain, peering timidly through the crack. The

sight that met her eyes was so unexpected that she almost laughed aloud.

Trotting alongside the coach, at a very sedate pace was a mule, loaded up with

furs and looking very disgruntled. Perched atop the furs, fast asleep, sat a fat little

man, his round bearded face beaming in his sleep, his fur hat tilted precariously over

one eye. He was dressed in a coat of velvet, richly embroidered all round with

gold, with a petticoat skirt reaching to his heels. Tanya had seen his type many

times in the streets of Moscow and knew him to be a merchant. There were

five or six outriders surrounding the coach, obviously guards paid to protect the

merchant from brigands. She let the curtain fall back and leant against the

seat. Where was she bound, and how would she be treated by the merchant?

True, he looked harmless enough, but you could never tell. She crossed to the

other side of the coach and peered out. All thoughts of jumping out of the slow



Tanya

271

moving coach were crushed, for there were guards on that side too. She sat

pensively staring ahead, concentrating on her present predicament to stop the

thought of yesterday‟s events from crowding into her mind. If she dwelt on that for

long, she would surely go mad!

The coach plodded on and on, until at last the horses were reined in, and it

came slowly to a halt. Her heart thumping, Tanya pulled her furs more securely

around her, covering her long, shapely legs which were still clad in the clerk‟s hose

and tried to look dignified. The coach door opened a crack, and the merchant‟s

face peered round. At the sight of her sitting up, it became wreathed in smiles,

and he bowed jerkily.

„You are feeling better, Madam?‟ he exclaimed. „I must apologise

profusely for running you down, the coachman did not see you until it was too

late. I didn‟t know what to do when you were knocked unconscious. What

shall I do? I asked myself. I cannot leave this young lad – begging your

pardon, but that was what I thought you at the time – lying here in the street.

That‟s what many would have done, I know, but that is not my way, I couldn‟t do

that. So, I said, I cannot stay to find out who you are, there are too many

urchins in the streets of Moscow, so, what was I to do? Aha, I thought, I shall

bring him inside the coach and carry him with us, and when he is better he

can return to Moscow if he wishes, if not, I can find him employment – that of

course being before I knew you were a lady. As soon as you came within the

coach, I realised you were not what I had thought, and I was again in a quandary,

for it is a different matter to carry a young girl with me, but I could think of no other

course of action. When I saw how grievously hurt you were, all covered in blood

like that, it made my mind up for me. So, we carried you off in the coach and

continued our journey. I stayed with you until you recovered consciousness, then



Tanya

272

seeing you were sleeping peacefully, I left you and rode my mule – not the most

comfortable method of travel, I might add, but I‟m not a good rider at the best of

times, and my old mule‟s pace suits me well. I‟m not as young as I was, no indeed.

But you must forgive me, here I am, rambling on like the silly old man that I am, and

I haven‟t even let you tell me how you are.‟

The old merchant paused for breath and looked at her anxiously. Tanya

smiled at him warmly.

„I am well, sir, I thank you, apart from a slight headache. I have indeed to

thank you, probably for my life, for had you left me where I fell, as most people

would have done, my fate would not have been an enviable one. Had they caught

up with me, I should now be . . .‟ she broke off and flushed. „But there, I do thank

you once again. Was I hurt elsewhere? I feel no pain. You say I was covered in . . .‟

With a cry of revulsion she sprang to her feet, the fur falling off her. She stared

down with dilated eyes at the large, dried brown stain spread across the front of

her tunic. She gave a little moan and, turning away, began to retch. With a cry of

alarm, the merchant clambered up into the coach, putting a fatherly arm around her

shoulders.

„There, there, I have upset you with my clumsy talk. Here.‟ He handed her a

cloth, and she wiped her mouth, her shoulders heaving as she began to sob.

„That‟s it, my dear, cry; cry all you want. It will make you feel much better.‟

So Tanya cried, bitterly, freely. She cried for the nightmare that her life had

become, cried for her mother and sister whom she had loved, now long dead, for

Sten‟ka, for Erik, for Veda, for dear Nicholas – all dead. What was it about her that

caused all those she loved to die? She must carry an aura of death with her. And

Ivan – her beloved Ivan – had she killed him too? No, he had been breathing steadily

when she ran away, although he was surely dead to her, for she would never see



Tanya

273

him again. What about poor little Peterkin? He too had probably been slain, in

retribution for her escape. She wept until she had no more tears and turned wildly to

the merchant, almost pushing him away.

„Don‟t befriend me,‟ she cried. „I bring bad luck and death to those I love – you

had best keep away from me.‟

„Nonsense,‟ he replied stolidly. „You‟ve had a bit of bad luck, I‟d guess – yes,

even tragedy perhaps, from what you were crying out last night – but you should

know better than to believe that sort of thing. Everyone‟s luck changes, and I have a

feeling yours is about to. Now, if you feel up to it, we have arrived at a posting house.

I thought perhaps you‟d like a bath and change of clothes, and something to eat. I‟ve

given the orders already.‟

Tanya looked at him gratefully.

„How kind you are!‟ she exclaimed wonderingly. „No one was ever so kind to

me as you, except perhaps my dear old Sten‟ka. You remind me a little of him – not

in looks, but in the kindness in your face. I shall tell you of him one day – perhaps

even the story of my life, although it is not a pretty one. Thank you, I should love a

bath more than anything. And I should be more than grateful if you could procure me

something a little more fitting to wear. It‟s terrible to ask you, for I have no money to

offer you. Once, I had more than I could spend in a lifetime, but now . . . But I will

work to pay you back. I‟m not afraid of work. I once worked as a kitchen maid, you

know?‟

The merchant laughed.

„The more I hear, the more I look forward to hearing the story of your life. It

sounds most intriguing. As for money – bah! I have far too much as it is. I shall do my

best to find you something, though I cannot guarantee what. Here, wrap this cloak

around you, or we shall have everyone staring. Come.‟



Tanya

274

Gratefully, Tanya wrapped the cloak around her, pulling the hood over her

dirty, tangled hair. Leaning on the merchant‟s arm, she entered the inn. There, he

handed her over to the Innkeeper‟s wife, who looked at her with a sniff, and showed

her to a poky little room where a maid was struggling to fill a hip bath with hot water.

Tanya sank down into a chair until the maid had finished, then, declining her offer of

help, shut the door on her, and bolted it. With frantic haste, she began to strip off her

clothing, shuddering with distaste. Stepping over to the huge log fire burning in the

grate, she threw every stitch on to it, watching with satisfaction as the cloth shrivelled

and turned black. So her past life should be finished too, burnt up in the fire,

consumed and turned to ashes. She would turn her back on it al, and try to forget.

Except Ivan. Him she would not – could not forget. He would hold her heart for the

rest of her life, this she knew beyond all doubt.

She sat dreamily in the tub, soaking her tired aching limbs in the hot water.

She felt unaccountably relaxed and guessed that the tears she had shed in the

coach had probably saved her sanity. She was abruptly awakened from her reverie

by a knock on the door.

„Who is it?‟ she called, wishing they would go away.

„It‟s the maid, madam. I have your clothes here.‟

With a sigh, Tanya stepped out of the tub, braiding up her wet hair and

wrapping the huge, soft towel around her. She unlocked the door, and the maid

came in.

„Here, madam. Do you require any help?‟

Tanya shook her head and took the clothes held out to her.

„No, I can manage, thank you. I shall be down in a moment. Is . . .‟ she

stopped and blushed, realising that she did not even know her benefactor‟s name. „Is

my travelling companion downstairs?‟



Tanya

275

„Yes, madam, he is waiting for you to join him to dine.‟

Tanya realised suddenly that she felt very hungry. Just an hour before, she

would have been nauseated at the thought of food, but her new-found optimism had

changed all that. She had no idea where the merchant had procured the clothes

from, but they were clean, and not too large, so she quickly put them on and finished

braiding her hair. She covered it with the white starched head-dress and surveyed

herself with satisfaction in the rather cracked and chipped mirror. She looked quite

dignified in the plain garb and, feeling more in command of herself, went downstairs.

She was directed to the dining room by the innkeeper‟s wife, who looked at her less

severely. She entered the room and dropped a curtsey as the merchant rose to his

feet. He clapped his hands together delightedly.

„Ah, you look much more the thing. I‟m glad to see you looking more cheerful.

Won‟t you join me for a little refreshment?‟

Tanya laughed, for the huge spread on the table was hardly her idea of a little

refreshment.

„Thank you, sir. I must admit to being more than a little hungry. I don‟t

remember the last time I ate.‟

She sat down and was soon eating hungrily. When their first hunger was

assuaged, the merchant leaned back in his chair, nibbling a sweetmeat.

„I must first repair my bad manners, my dear. Allow me to introduce myself.

My name is Olaf Brovski, widower – a merchant of Yaroslavl. I have been used to

trade in gold and fine silks and spices. Not that I do much business these days – I

am semi-retired. Unfortunately, my health is not good, and as I have made more

money than I can ever spend, I am spending my time relaxing. And, may I add that I

extend my hospitality to you for as long as you wish.‟

Tanya blushed and looked down at her plate.



Tanya

276

„Thank you, sir, you are most kind. Of course, I cannot accept. I have nothing

to offer in return. I am quite penniless, and I must admit, rather on the wrong side of

the law at the moment. I should bring you nothing but trouble.‟

„Nonsense, child. I shal accept no refusals from you. Just where do you think

you would go, out here in the middle of nowhere? I am on my way home, where I live

quite alone and should be most grateful for the company.‟

He held up his hand to check her attempt to interrupt. „I shall accept no

arguments. Consider it settled. Later, when we are home, we will talk over what your

plans shall be. I may add that I never had any children but always wanted a

daughter. I should like to think that if I had, she would have turned out something like

you. Not quite so lovely, I don‟t expect, for I‟m no oil painting, and my wife, God rest

her soul, was more famed for her cooking than her looks, but there. Wrong side of

the law or not, I‟m quite convinced you have done nothing to be ashamed of.‟

Tanya bit her lip, then looked him directly in the eyes. „I . . . I killed a man. Last

night. My greatest friend. Now what do you say?‟

„I know,‟ replied Olaf unperturbed. „You said as much in your ramblings last

night. I am also quite convinced that it was a terrible accident. Is that not so?‟

Tanya nodded, blinking back the tears.

„It was him, or the man that I love. They were fighting, and Nich . . . my friend,

got the upper hand. He would have killed Ivan, and I cried out, “No”. It stayed his

hand, and instead, Ivan killed him. It was terrible. You see, he . . . Nicholas . . . loved

me very much, and I betrayed him. Ivan . . . Ivan cares for me not at all. But I couldn‟t

help myself.‟

Olaf nodded sympathetically.



Tanya

277

„I thought as much. It all sounds very complicated, but I shall not pry. When

and if you are ready to tell me, when we are better acquainted, I shall be honoured to

listen.‟

Tanya looked at him shyly.

„How kind you are! If you would be interested, perhaps you would like to ride

with me in the coach. I will start from the very beginning and tell you everything.

Already I feel as if I have known you all my life. I should very much like to have you

for the father I never had. I know without doubt that I can trust you completely, and it

will help me to get it off my conscience.‟

So, soon, they were on their way again, sitting opposite one another in the

swaying coach, and Tanya began to speak. She spoke simply and quietly, and the

shadows were lengthening into night when at last she finished and leant back

against the cushions with a sigh. She looked anxiously at her new-found friend to

see what effect her words had had. He was shaking his head in wonderment.

„I‟ve never heard such a tale in all my life,‟ he cried. „It comes from between

the pages of a fairytale book. And to think you have lived through all those terrible

things, and still look so young and untouched. It‟s quite incredible.‟

Tanya smiled a little sadly. She had told the little merchant most about her life,

but had skimmed over certain parts, notably where Ivan was concerned, for she felt

she could speak of her innermost feelings for him to no one, not even her benefactor.

„I may be untouched from the outside, but in here, I shall never be quite the

same. In here‟ – she touched her heart – „in here, I am old, tired, and more than a

little ugly.‟ She smiled wanly and passed her hand across her eyes. „I‟m very tired, do

you mind if I try to sleep now?‟

„Of course not, Tanya. I may call you that? Thank you. In about an hour, we

shall reach the next staging post, then another few days travel, and we shal be



Tanya

278

home. You shal have plenty of rest and good food, and you will soon be blooming

and healthy again.‟

After a long and rather tiring journey, during which Tanya had ample time to

get to know her new friend better and to appreciate what a good, kind man she had

been lucky enough to fall in with, the tired horses at last pulled their coach through

the streets of Yaroslavl, a thriving community standing on the banks of the River

Volga. Soon they were drawing up before a large, brick-built house which Olaf

indicated with a broad sweep of his hand.

„My humble home,‟ he cried. „Welcome.‟

They entered the house, which was luxuriously decorated and furnished. It

consisted of about thirty rooms, Olaf informed her, and he had a staff of five servants

to run it for him. Because he was not a noble, he was not allowed to own serfs, so

the servants were, for the most part, a little better, dressed and educated. They had

all assembled in the hall to meet their master and stared at Tanya in undisguised

antipathy as she entered on Olaf‟s arm. He sensed this immediately and introduced

her as Tanya Doriev, the daughter of his old friend who had now died and left her in

his care.

„She is my ward now and will be to me the daughter I never had. You are to

treat her with the respect she deserves,‟ he informed them severely and led her

forward to introduce her to them. They now smiled and shyly bade her welcome, and

Tanya somehow knew that this was a happy house, and one where she would find

the peace she needed to get over the horror of the past few weeks.

Tanya followed Olaf into a large drawing room set off from the main hall, and

sank wearily into a chair, smiling at her host.

„That was very sweet of you to introduce me like that, but haven‟t you rather

committed yourself? I cannot continue to live off you in this way.‟



Tanya

279

„I won‟t hear another word,‟ cried Olaf and beamed down at her. „It would

make me very unhappy if you should go away, have you thought of that? I don‟t want

to go back to my dull old existence – you have put new life into this old carcass of

mine. I feel better than I have felt for months. You shall stay for just as long as you

want to, but if you really wish to leave at any time, of course, I shall not stand in your

way. But won‟t you let an old man have his way this once?‟

Tanya looked at him with tears in her eyes.

„Very well, my dear friend – for I already look upon you as such. Indeed, I feel

as if I have known you for ever. I promise not to mention the subject again. I shall

stay for as long as you need me, I promise. But remember, whenever you want me

to leave, you have only to say. Now, I shall not say another word. I am well versed in

running household matters and shall seek to pay back your great kindness to me by

taking from your shoulders such burdens as I can.‟

Tanya had one more favour to ask of Olaf before she tried her hardest to

eliminate from her mind all the happenings of the past few months. She asked him if

he would send an emissary to Moscow to find out what had happened to the brave

child, Peterkin, who had risked everything for her sake. He was most willing and

despatched a groom off to Moscow the next day, with instructions to ask discreet

questions and to do everything in his power to trace the child. He was gone for over

a month until Tanya almost began to think he had absconded with the purse Olaf

had given him for expenses, bribes, and such. However, eventually he arrived back,

besmeared with mud, tired and dispirited. He had tried all in his power to find out

what had happened to Peterkin, but it seemed the lad had disappeared into thin air.

With a heavy heart, Tanya had to accept this, for Olaf would not hear of her

going back to Moscow herself; indeed, he became quite upset when she showed

signs of going, regardless, and she was forced to concur that she could do no more



Tanya

280

than Olaf‟s servant – indeed, probably far less, as she herself was wanted there. So

she regretfully gave in, although she would often think of Peterkin and wonder what

had become of the small urchin who had taken a corner of her heart.

During the following months, Tanya was as good as her word. She soon had

the house running smoothly and efficiently, and Olaf was always exclaiming that he

couldn‟t imagine how they had managed before she came. She threw herself whole-

heartedly into her work, mainly to ease the ache which was always in her heart,

partly for Nicholas, and partly for Ivan. She still yearned for him with every fibre of her

being; it seemed to make no difference that they were separated irrevocably by more

that just miles. She pushed him sternly into the back of her mind, for she was

convinced she would never see him again, and probably, she told herself fiercely,

that would be for the better. He knew now that she loved him, and she often bitterly

regretted revealing her feelings to him, for he probably despised her now more than

ever. And so, she tried hard not to think of him too much, and it was only at night, as

she lay alone in the huge, comfortable bed that her feelings overcame her, and then

she would weep into her pillow and murmur his name over and over until she fell

asleep. But mainly she was as happy as she could be in her new life. The months of

quiet and order were a balm to her battered spirits, and it was good to have one day

follow another in calm order.

During the long winter evenings, she would sit with Olaf by the roaring fire and

listen in wonderment as he told her of the boats he had owned, and how when he

was a young man, he had travelled to the Orient, bringing back the gold and spices

that had made him his fortune. He had sailed the Volga River up to the port of

Arkhangelsk and, from there, across the oceans. He spoke of how he had

been away when Yaroslavl endured a disastrous fire which destroyed most

of the city‟s few remaining wooden buildings, and how from this point



Tanya

281

onwards Yaroslavl began to develop as a city built almost exclusively out of

bricks and mortar. Since the founding of St Petersb urg by the Tsar,

Arkhangelsk had become far less important as a port, and he was only glad

he had made his fortune when he had.

And so the weeks slipped by, and summer came and went. With the drawing

in of the nights, Olaf seemed to get thinner, and his face was often drawn in pain.

One winter evening, Tanya came into his study to find him leaning back in his chair,

his face white and drawn, and she flew across the room to kneel at his side.

„Olaf, Olaf, what is it? Are you in pain? Let me fetch the physician.‟ He nodded,

gasping for breath.

„Yes, my love, please. They tell me it is the wasting disease, which has been

getting worse for many years, but especially over the past year. The old rogue can

do little for me, but he has some vile potion that eases the pain.‟

Tanya ran out of the room and sent one of the maids to fetch the apothecary.

He arrived quickly and gave Olaf some of his medicines.

„You must stay in bed, old friend,‟ he ordered sternly. He turned to Tanya.

„See that he has this medicine every day. It will not cure him, of course, but it

will ease the pain.‟

Tanya walked to the door with the physician and looked at him worriedly.

„Is he very ill?‟ she asked quietly. „Please tell me the truth.‟

„Yes, I‟m afraid so. I have never seen anyone recover from this wasting

disease, and the pain only gets worse. He will be lucky to live out the year.‟

„Oh no,‟ cried Tanya in distress. „I can‟t believe it. Not Olaf, he is so good and

kind, he doesn‟t deserve to die.‟

„The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away,‟ the physician told her sternly and

left.



Tanya

282

And so Tanya nursed the old man through the long winter months. His weight

fell away until he was a shadow of his former self, but he still somehow managed to

stay positive, and never complained. One morning, about a week before Christmas,

he sat up in bed, looking almost like his old self, and cried that he had never felt

better. The whole household was soon running around, happy and laughing, cooking

his favourite meal, and doing everything they could for his comfort. Tanya had the fire

banked up in his room, and he got out of bed to sit swathed in blankets before the

leaping flames. She curled up at his feet, and he told her again of days long gone,

when he was young and vigorous, and how he had loved his life. He was talking

more to himself than to Tanya, and once he called her Hilda, his wife‟s name. After a

while, his voice faded, and he fell asleep. Tanya kissed him gently on the forehead,

and tiptoed out, glad to see him so much better.

Tanya slept fitfully that night and awoke suddenly with a jump, feeling

somehow that she should go to Olaf. She slipped on a wrap and hurried to his room.

Creeping inside, she saw that he was awake and whispering her name. She knelt

down beside him, blinking back the tears at his emaciated appearance.

„I am here, Olaf, beside you. What is it, my dear friend?‟ she said softly.

„I just wanted to hold your hand,‟ he whispered, taking it between his own. „And

to thank you for making this past year such a happy one. God bless you, my dear.‟

Tanya knelt there beside him, unashamed tears running down her face. „I

have far, far more to thank you for, dear friend. Go back to sleep, I am here with you.‟

With a smile, he leaned his head back and closed his eyes. Tanya knelt

beside him until her legs were aching with cramp, then eased her hand out from his

and stood up, stretching her muscles. She looked down at his peaceful face, and it

was with a sense of almost calm acceptance that she realised he was no longer

breathing. She walked unsteadily to the door and called for the housekeeper who



Tanya

283

came running. She told her quietly what had happened and to send for the physician

in the morning, then she went to her room.

Once there, looking around the now dear, familiar walls, her reserve broke,

and she sobbed for the kind old man who had been such a dear friend to her.

Although the physician had told her Olaf was dying, it was still with a sense of shock

that she realised yet another person loved by her was dead! She sat unmoving,

staring into the darkness with cold chills running up and down her spine. Could it be

true that whoever loved her, and was loved by her in return, was fated to die? She

gave herself a mental shake, trying to rally her spirits. It was not like her to be morbid

and superstitious. She would go to bed now and try to sleep and in the morning,

come to terms with her new situation.

She awoke with the dawn after sleeping fitfully and washed and dressed,

wandering up and down her room, feeling lost. She still could not believe that Olaf

was gone and knew that soon she would have to leave. She had no idea where she

would go – certainly not back to Moscow. She would have to get a job of some kind

somewhere to enable her to live. She sighed, and her shoulders drooped. Life was

such a sad, miserable burden. She had rarely, in all her life, felt really happy. Just

that once, in the mean prison cell when Ivan had taken her in his arms and loved her,

had she felt truly, deliriously happy, and it had been so short lived.

She was snapped out of her mood of self-pity by a knock on the door.

„Enter,‟ she called, and Katrin, the housekeeper, peeped around the door.

„Pardon me, miss,‟ she sniffed, her eyes looking red and swollen with grief.

„The physician is downstairs, and may he have a word with you?‟

„Of course,‟ replied Tanya and looked quickly into the mirror, smoothing the

folds of the black dress she had donned in memory of Olaf. She straightened her

headdress and followed the housekeeper downstairs.



Tanya

284

The physician rose to his feet when she entered the room and bowed.

„Thank you for coming so promptly, my dear. First, please accept my

condolences. I, too, feel great grief at the passing of my good friend, even though it

was not unexpected. I told Olaf myself, just a week ago that the end was imminent,

and he wrote this letter for you, instructing me to give it to you on his death. I have

already made arrangements for the funeral, which will be tomorrow. Just a quiet

affair, as he wished. I shall leave you alone to read it. God bless you, my dear.‟ He

handed her the letter and left quietly, shutting the door behind him.

Tanya sat down by the fire and, with trembling fingers, opened the envelope.

Her eyes blurred over with tears, as she saw how shaky and uncertain the writing

was, and she had to wait a moment for her vision to clear. Then she began to read.

„Dearest Tanya,‟ it began. „I know that you will be feeling very sad and lost, and

I am sad to be leaving you. However, I want you to know that you made the last year

of my life a very happy one – I have been lonely for so long, you cannot know what it

has meant to me to have you with me. You know that you have been to me the

daughter I never had, and as such, I have made provision for your future. I can then

go in peace, knowing you will be cared for. I have deposited most of my life savings

for you with a good friend of mine, M‟sieur Savaret, a financier in Paris. I want you to

go to France and meet your relatives and start a new life there. All I ask is that you

make provision for my faithful servants for their service to me. There is nothing now

to keep you in Russia, except for the man I know you love, and I am sure that one

day fate will smile kindly on you there. But for now, dear one, go and do not look

back. Just keep a small place in your heart for an old man who loved you. God bless

you, Tanya.‟

Her tears fell on the signature, smudging it, and she clasped the letter to her

breast.



Tanya

285

„I will never forget you, dear Olaf,‟ she vowed. „I owe you so much, more than I

can every repay. Thank you, thank you, old friend, I shall do as you say.‟

The next few days passed quickly. Tanya was glad when the funeral was

over, for the drab coffin and the bitter wind swirling the snow flakes down from a

slate-coloured sky seemed no part of the cheerful, happy man who had been a

father to her. After it was over, she called the servants together and told them of the

generous provision she had made for all of them and that they were to stay in the

house as long as they wanted. She told them she was going away in the morning

but did not tell them where she was going. She wanted the break to be final.

Olaf had left her the address of the financier, with instructions on how to reach

him, and although she felt she was leaving with indecent haste now that her

benefactor was dead, she felt nothing but a strong desire to shake the dust of

Yaroslavl – and indeed, of all Russia – from her feet.

As the travelling coach left the next day, bound on the long and probably

dangerous journey to Paris, she sank back on the cushions and did not look back as

it swept through the cold streets.

Another chapter of her life had come to an end, and whatever the future held,

for her, she would never forget the quiet, gentle old man who had brought her back

from the depths of hell and given her a reason to live.



Tanya

286





Chapter 11


Tanya sighed despondently as Yvette, her personal maid, pulled the brush

through her long, tawny hair, making it shine like fire in the candlelight. She

dismissed the maid and leaned back in her chair, studying her reflection in

the mirror. The face that looked back at her had changed little from that of

the young girl who had first married Prince Mensherikovsky. The skin was as

flawless, the eyes as clear and untroubled as on that far off day. It seemed

incredible to her that she could have been through so much, yet outwardly

had changed so little. She sighed again, thinking that her face had certainly

not been her fortune. She was now twenty-two years old, and in the past

nine years, since that fateful day when the Cossacks had come raiding and

ruined her life, she had seen more pain and strife than most people see in a

lifetime.

But now, her life seemed to have come to a full stop. Each day slipped

by uneventfully, much the same as the last, and the future seemed to stretch

out before her, grey and empty. Perhaps she had been wrong to bury herself

here in the countryside outside Paris, but when she had learnt that her old

family home, the Chateau Verrière, was empty and falling into decay, she

had been unable to resist the thought of buying it and restoring it to its former

prosperity. The owner, of course, had been her uncle, the present Comte de

la Verrière, who had neither the money nor the desire to pay for the upkeep

of the old house.

At the thought of her uncle, Tanya‟s thoughts slipped back to the warm

June evening, when after a long, weary journey of nearly four months, she

had at last arrived in Paris, leaving Russia far behind. She had loved that city



Tanya

287

at first glance; it gave her none of the qualms that her first sight of Moscow

had inspired.

She had gone straight to M‟sieur Savaret, the financier whom her

benefactor, Olaf, had entrusted with his fortune. He and his wife had

welcomed her with open arms, and she had been pleased to stay with them

until she had introduced herself to her new family, her father‟s brother, the

Comte de la Verrière. They had, of course, known that her father had

married in Sweden but had only known of the one daughter, her poor dead

sister Gerda, for her mother had never communicated with them after her

father‟s death. They had been more than a little surprised and suspicious

when she was announced as Mademoiselle de la Verrière, but on hearing

some of her story, and learning that she was extremely wealthy, had

welcomed her effusively. Tanya herself had been surprised to find they were

as poor as church mice. They still contrived to attend what court functions

they could but managed to live in some sort of style only by falling deeper

and deeper into debt.

The Comte‟s wife was dead, but he had a son, Gervaise, living with

him, a young man of twenty-eight, who had inherited none of his father‟s

good looks but, unfortunately, most of his bad habits. He was a hardened

gamester who lived each day on the fall of the dice. Tanya‟s offer to buy the

Chateau, after she had been take n on a visit to see the old family home had

been eagerly accepted. The Comte would under no circumstances have sold

the house outside the family, he was too proud for that, but if his niece

wished to be encumbered with all the debts the tumbledown old place had

accumulated, that was a different matter!



Tanya

288

During the weeks she had stayed with her uncle, whilst the Chateau

was being made habitable, she had been amused to find herself being thrust

more and more into the company of her cousin Gervaise. Obviously, the

Comte was hopeful of developments which would bring his niece‟s fortune

back into his family. The fact that Gervaise was no more enthusiastic than

she was of little consequence to him. Tanya had endured this for a while, but

eventually had taken the Comte aside and told him that she had no wish to

remarry, but as she had such a large amount of money, would he consider

taking an allowance from her? She had been more than a little embarrassed

at making the offer, but her uncle had accepted with alacrity, and when she

had finally left to take up residence in her new home, they had parted

warmly. She had seen him a few times since, although she never attended

any court functions.

At the thought of the court, her mind flew back to the evening her uncle

had taken her to be presented to his most Gracious Majesty, Louis XIV of

France. She had heard so many stories from her mother of the Sun King –

her father, it seemed, had talked of little else. She had been filled with a

strange sense almost of achievement that she had won her way back to that

which was, really, her birthright. Her first feeling on being presented to the

King had been one of disappointment. She had forgotten that the young,

handsome King of her father‟s day was gone for ever. Louis, however, still

retained much of his extraordinary charm, and there was no doubt at all that

he was King – he exuded dignity in everything he did. Tanya had been most

favourably impressed and could not help but compare this tall, dignified man

and his Court to that of Tsar Peter. The Sun King‟s Court might no longer

have quite the glitter it had had in his younger days, but the social activities



Tanya

289

were still many and varied. The courtiers whiled away their idle hours

gaming, dancing, and hunting – still the favourite sport of the King – and, of

course, fighting over things that, to Tanya, seemed quite ludicrous. She once

saw a woman swoon away when she found she had been granted a footstall,

to allow her to sit in the King‟s presence, and on another occasion had

actually seen a pair of painted young men come to blows over some trifling

breach of etiquette.

The influence of Françoise d‟Aubigné, Marquise de Maintenon, widow

of the poet Scarron and morganatic wife of the King, was everywhere. She

was a serious, pious woman who showed open disapproval of the young

heedless courtiers, especially the women whom she denounced for their

„immodest dress, laziness, and promiscuity‟. But many of these young people

centred their attentions around Marie Adelaide, the charming young wife of

Louis‟s grandson, the Duc de Bourgogne. She was a beautiful, vivacious girl

to whom Tanya had taken an instant liking.

The King had announced himself captivated when Tanya had been

presented to him, and his lavish compliments had embarrassed her a little,

although she had taken little notice at the time. She had been surprised to

learn afterwards that it was rare these days for the King to pay such

extravagant compliments, and, on her later visits to the Court, the King had

singled her out many times. That was when the gossip had started, when

she had become aware of the sudden silences when she walked into a room

– of the nudging and whispering that ensued when she left. More than

anything, she had felt an overwhelming tiredness – a wish to just go away

and be on her own, away from everything. And so, that was what she had

done.



Tanya

290

Louis had tried in vain to keep her at the Court, but she had been

adamant. Of course, by rights, she reflected, he could have ordered her to

stay, for having thrown herself on the mercy of her father‟s country, she was

in effect a subject of the King. However, the situation had not arisen.

Reluctantly, Louis had granted her permission to retire to her Chateau in the

quiet countryside, about 100 kilometres from Paris.

And so had begun this quiet existence , which, at first, had been balm

to her battered spirit. She had had plenty to occupy her, furnishing the old

house and restoring some of its former grandeur. She had come near to

peace during those early weeks, but as the months began to slip past, she

found herself becoming more and more restless. Tonight, she felt strangely

on edge and unable to settle. It was weeks since she had seen anyone. The

last visit of her uncle had been fleeting, and more, she was convinced, from

curiosity as to what she had done to the house and what she did with herself

than from a matter of choice.

Tanya shivered and pulled her wrap more closely around her

shoulders. Thunder was rumbling far in the distance, yet the air around her

felt almost electric. She had never felt less like sleeping, and she got to her

feet, wandering around the bedchamber aimlessly. As always, when

darkness began to fall and the shadows lengthened in the room, her

thoughts were inexorably drawn to Ivan. Much as she despised herself, she

could not help but think of him, and the longing would start deep in the pit of

her stomach until the ache to hold him in her arms was almost unbearable.

She gritted her teeth, quickening her pace, then with a violence quite alien to

her nature, picked up a beautiful statuette standing on her bedside table and

sent it spinning across the room to shatter in the fireplace.



Tanya

291

At the explosion of sound, she began to tremble violently, fighting the

tears that threatened. Despair almost engulfed her completely, and in that

moment, she knew that she must stop this useless existence, must break out

of her solitude, otherwise without a doubt, she would go slowly mad.

The decision made, she was about to pull the bell cord when Yvette‟s

startled face appeared in the doorway. She glanced at the remains of the

statuette in the hearth and looked curiously at her mistress. Tanya‟s face

was flushed, her eyes sparkling. She laughed suddenly and clapped her

hands.

„Yvette,‟ she cried impulsively. „I was about to ring for you. Yvette – we

are going to Paris. Please order the necessary arrangements to be made. I

wish to leave as soon as possible, before I change my mind.‟

The young girl‟s face lit up with excitement. She was a local girl whose

father owned a small farm nearby, and she had been with Tanya since she

had first arrived. She was small and thin, with a little pointed face saved from

plainness by a pair of large, luminous brown eyes, and a luxurious mop of

dark curls.

„Oh, Madame,‟ she exclaimed excitedly. „I‟ve never been to Paris.‟ Her

face dropped suddenly, and she looked at Tanya anxiously.

„You do mean me to come, don‟t you, Madame,‟ she faltered, „or will

you want a proper, sophisticated lady‟s maid who‟ll know how to go on?‟

Tanya laughed. „Of course you‟ll come with me, Yvette, don‟t look so

downcast. I shouldn‟t dream of leaving you behind. Please tell Jules to

arrange to rent a house for me in a good quarter of Paris and have him send

a courier to ask the King‟s permission for me to present myself at Court. I

want it all done as quickly as possible.‟



Tanya

292

The girl flew off to do her bidding, and Tanya jumped into bed, feeling

absurdly young and excited. Now that the decision was made, she felt much

better. After all, she was still young, too young to spend her life mourning

over what might have been. Quiet and solitude had not driven the thought of

Ivan from her mind, so she would try to forget in the mad whirl of life at Court.

If life there palled, why, she could always come back here to her haven to

rest, to try once again to find peace.

The next weeks flew by in a whirl of activity, and in no time at all,

Tanya was leaving the Chateau bound for Paris in her large travelling coach,

followed by another carrying her servants and yet another piled high with all

the baggage thought necessary to provide a lady with every comfort. They

stayed at an inn overnight, for the roads of France were notoriously bad,

almost as bad as those of Russia, and the winter that had just passed had

been a severe one. But now, spring was in the air, which probably, she

decided, was to blame for her urge to be on the move.

Tanya was delighted with the tall, elegant house that had been rented

for her, and soon she and her retinue were comfortably established there.

Many people, she knew, li ved at the Court, but that life was not to her taste ,

for it meant existing in one poky room, shuffled about from place to place.

She liked her freedom too much for that.

When she was settled in, Tanya went to visit her uncle, and on

informing him that the King had graciously given his consent for her to be

presented again at Court, he immediately invited her to a supper to be held

on the following evening.

Tanya spent the next day with Yvette, shopping, for she must make

sure she was in the latest fashion; it would never do to be presented wearing



Tanya

293

last year‟s dresses. She spent just the sort of day that she had often

dreamed of back in Sweden, as a young girl. She had had plenty such days

in Moscow, of course, but it was not to be compared with the choice to be

had here in the fashion capital of the world.

When eventually she stood in front of the mirror, ready to leave, she

was glad she had taken the trouble, for she was undoubtedly looking her

radiant best. In a dress of emerald green silk cut low across the bosom , her

throat and arms adorned with flashing diamonds, and a tiara of the same

stones sparkling in her piled-up hair, she looked magnificent.

Her uncle, when he arrived with Gervaise in tow, complimented her

extravagantly on her appearance, and when at last they stepped into the

crowded room, under a barrage of eyes, she at least had the consolation of

knowing that no fault could be found with her appearance.

She could see the admiration and desire in the eyes of the men and

the familiar hatred in the eyes of the women. Almost before she was aware,

she found herself being presented once more to the King, and she sank into

a low curtsey. Louis himself raised her to her feet, retaining her hands until

she raised her eyes to his face.

The King looked resplendent in mulberry velvet, and his eyes were

warm with undisguised admiration, and something else that Tanya dared not

fathom. For a moment, she almost panicked, and she wondered what she

was doing here in this hot, crowded room, then the feeling passed, and she

felt only exhilaration.

Louis stayed by her side for the best part of the evening, and Tanya

was uncomfortably aware of Madame de Maintenon‟s scandalised face in the

background and the barely concealed amusement and enjoyment felt by



Tanya

294

many of the courtiers at that good lady‟s discomfiture. The „widow Scarron‟,

as her enemies still called her, was not popular, especially among the

younger element, and there were many who would rejoice to see her nose

put out of joint.

To Tanya, after her long retirement, the evening was exhilarating, and

she did nothing to repulse the King‟s attentions, although deep down, a little

voice was warning her not to play with fire!

Tanya soon slipped back into the daily routine of hunting, dancing , and

generally idling her life away, throwing herself into every festivity with a

fierce, almost defiant gaiety, but underneath it all, she was still no happier,

and somehow the promise she had felt when she had made the decision to

return to Court had never been realised. The fact that every man she met

was being compared subconsciously with the image of the tall, fair-haired

man for ever in her mind did little to ease her unhappiness.

Tanya sighed and leaned back in the chair as Yvette put the finishing

touches to her hair. The young girl had learnt fast, and soon had all the arts

of fashion at her fingertips. Tanya stood up, shaking out the folds of her white

silk dress. Tonight she had surpassed herself, and the image looking back at

her from the mirror was truly exquisite. The white low-cut dress was liberally

sprinkled with diamonds, and her only jewellery was a necklace of the same

stones. Her hair looked like fire against the white, and Yvette clasped her

hands together ecstatically.

„Madame looks ravishing. You will cast in the shade every lady there

tonight. How they will hate you! But the men! Oh, how they will be at your

feet.‟

Tanya shrugged impatiently.



Tanya

295

„I‟ve half a mind not to go,‟ she exclaimed petulantly. „I have no taste

for state occasions. It seems half the civilised world will be there tonight. But

there, I suppose I must. Is the carriage ready?‟

„Yes, it is waiting. Shall I wait up for you, Madame?‟

„No, no, it is sure to go on until the early hours. Unlike half the ladies of

this Court, I am quite capable of undressing myself. Goodnight, Yvette. I

shall sleep late tomorrow, no doubt.‟

As she settled back in the carriage, Tanya asked herself what she was

doing here on her way to a French King‟s state banquet. What had happened

to her life? Why did she feel so empty? Deep in her heart, she knew the

answer, of course, but she pushed the thought away angrily, refusing to

acknowledge it even to herself.

The banquet was to be held at Versailles, and the coach bumped and

swayed over the uneven road. Tanya felt herself thinking of another time, in

another coach, when a dark-featured man rode outside, and she had been a

young girl, frightened and alone. How long ago it all seemed – she even had

difficulty in recalling Erik‟s face. Poor, tragic Erik. She gave herself a mental

shake. It had been so long since she had thought of him. She still felt pain at

his unhappy life and untimely end.

She was glad when the coach finally arrived at the beautiful palace of

Versailles. She ascended the steps into the glittering light of hundreds of

candelabra, reflected again in the mirrors lining the walls of the huge

ballroom. She was soon surrounded by the usual crowd of gallants and

forced herself to laugh at their inane remarks and pleasantries. She

presented herself to the King and was soon being led to dinner by the

Vicomte Faubergé, an older man who caused her less annoyance than most.



Tanya

296

She nibbled at a few courses, but had no appetite at all and was glad when

the interminable meal was over. She followed the crowd flocking back into

the ballroom, for she had no taste for gaming and rarely frequented the

tables and was soon in demand for dance after dance.

Seeing the Comte de Fontaine advancing towards her with a

purposeful gleam in his eye, an elderly rouè whom she disliked intensely,

she hastily excused herself and slipped into one of the numerous rooms

leading off the ballroom. Fanning herself vigorously, for it was stifling in the

small room, she thought longingly of her comfortable bed at home and was

trying to think of a way of slipping out without being seen, when a voice

spoke behind her.

„What is this, the loveliest lady of our Court, hiding here alone? This

must not be.‟

She swung round to face the King, her heart beating hard. It was the

last thing she wanted, to be here alone with Louis. She sank into a deep

curtsey.

„Your pardon, Sire, it was so hot, and I must admit to a great desire to

take off my shoes and sit down.‟

The King laughed delightedly.

„That‟s what I love about you, Tanya – I may call you Tanya, may I not?

– you always say such unexpected things. It makes such a refreshing

change. Most ladies would have something much more amorous in mind.

You are not awaiting some fortunate man?‟

„No, Sire, I am not,‟ replied Tanya firmly, wondering how to escape.



Tanya

297

„No, of course not, it is common knowledge that you are, so rumour has

it, cold and unapproachable.‟ He took a step nearer. „I find that hard to

believe.‟

His voice deepened as he ran his eyes appreciatively over her,

lingering on her bosom. Tanya managed a light, unconcerned laugh.

„Nay, Sire, not cold or unapproachable. I just have not yet met the man

that takes my fancy.‟ She sidestepped and walked to the door. „Your guests

will be wondering where you are. You must not spend too much time with

one as unimportant as me.‟

She pulled aside the curtain and sank into another curtsey. A look of

annoyance crossed the King‟s face, and Tanya wondered if she had gone

too far. Then he laughed and bowed.

„Touchè, Mademoiselle. So be it. But be warned – I do not give up

easily. What I want, I always get. After all, am I not King of the most civilised

country in the world?‟

He stepped through the curtains, then turned, taking both her hands

raised her up. Tanya was uncomfortably aware of hundreds of eyes boring

into her as he bent his head and kissed first one hand, then the other. Now

the whispering would grow louder, the flattery more intense from all the

hangers-on, seeking to curry favour with the King through her. Sometimes

she wished she had been born with a plain, ordinary sort of face. Where

would she be now? Probably working as a servant somewhere, getting old

before her time. No, anything was preferable to that.

The King released her hands and disappeared into the crowd, and for a

moment, Tanya was alone. It was with annoyance that she felt a tap on her

shoulder and a lisping voice in her ear.



Tanya

298

„Ah, Mademoiselle de la Verrière. You have not, I believe, been

introduced to our distinguished guest, the new Russian Ambassador. I

understand you have come from that country. Allow me to present the Count

Dostoyevskiy. Count – Mademoiselle de la Verrière.‟

Tanya stood for a moment, as if turned to stone, as the babble of

voices faded into the distance at the sound of his name ; then she turned

slowly like a sleepwalker. She forced her eyes up , and there, like a dream

come to life, stood Ivan, just as she had seen him so often during the long,

sleepless nights. Her hand flew up to her breast, and she felt suffocated and

faint. She saw the look of shock on Ivan‟s face, the way his eyes were fixed

on the King, so recently gone from her side. She saw the dreaded look of

scorn come into his eyes, and it was like a slap in the face. The sounds of

the room came flooding back, and somehow she found her voice.

„Count Dostoyevskiy?‟ she said coldly and made a small, almost

insolent curtsey. „Ah, there is the Vicomte come to claim his dance. You must

excuse me.‟

She turned and almost ran into the press of people, aware of the

surprise on the faces around Ivan. With death in her heart, she pushed her

way through to the other side of the room, then leaned back against the wall,

holding a trembling hand to her eyes. Surely all the fates were against her.

To meet him here, in such a way was bad enough, but to know he had seen

her coming from the alcove with the King, seen him kiss her hands in such a

fashion, he must surely be thinking what everyone else in the room

undoubtedly thought – that she was the King‟s mistress. She was aware of

only one thing: she must get out of this place, away, somewhere quiet. She

stared blindly before her, fighting back the tears. Starting towards the door,



Tanya

299

she pushed her way out, then she was running towards the huge glass doors

that led out on to the beautiful gardens of Versailles. She slipped out on to

the moonlit terrace, breathing great gulps of the cool night air. She walked

slowly down to where the great fountains played, their tumbling waters silver

in the moonlight. Suddenly, a voice spoke behind her, making her jump.

„You choose a strange place to dance, Mademoiselle. Or are you,

perhaps, awaiting some higher personage than a mere vicomte?‟

Tanya swung round, her face white. „Why have you followed me here?

Go away and leave me alone.‟

Ivan laughed harshly, and Tanya winced at the ugly sound.

„So you can meet your lover? I wondered how you got here, so high in

Court circles, with your diamonds and fancy clothes. I need look no further. I

don‟t know how you managed it, but accept my congratulations. You‟ ve sold

your body, haven‟t you, obviously to the highest bidder? What does it feel

like, to be mistress to a King?‟

The blood flamed in Tanya‟s cheeks, and she took a step backward.

He was always so ready to think ill of her. All right, let him. She threw back

her head and met his eyes defiantly.

„Who wouldn‟t want to be first lady in the land?‟ Her voice sounded

hard and brittle even to her own ears. „It feels good, if you want to know.

After all, what is a body for?‟ She stepped towards him, her eyes brilliant and

hard as emeralds.

„It is a lovely body, isn‟t it, Ivan – remember? You‟ve had it once, you

should know.‟

She stood close to him now, almost touching, and as she looked up

into his eyes, she almost swooned at his nearness. In spite of her anger, the



Tanya

300

urge to throw herself into his arms, to scream that she was lying, was almost

uncontrollable. He reached out to touch her, then snatched his hands away,

as though burned.

„Tanya, Tanya,‟ he murmured, then he stepped back, breaking the

spell.

„Whore,‟ he said coldly and clearly, then turned and walked away.

Tanya sobbed and stepped after him blindly, her eyes blurred with

tears, arms outstretched, then they dropped to her sides hopelessly as the

tears ran down her face. What had she done? If only he had not made her so

angry. She always said things she regretted when she lost her temper. Now

she had lost him for ever. He would never look at her again without that look

of scorn and contempt in his clear, grey eyes.

Like a sleepwalker, she returned to the crowded ballroom, excused

herself to the King, pleading a bad headache, and soon her coach was

called, and she was on her way home. She felt as if she was in some terrible

nightmare and wished she could awake and find it had all been a bad dream.

But alas, it was all too true. Ivan was here in Paris. Once she had thought

that she could want nothing more in the whole world, but now she wanted

only to get away. There was only one thing to do – go back to her Chateau

and bury herself again in the quiet countryside. She could never face Ivan

again, of that she was certain.

Yvette was still up and, taking one look at her mistress‟s white strained

face, undressed her gently and put her to bed. She did not understand what

had happened, but it hurt her to see Tanya looking so ill. Before she left,

Tanya called to her.

„Yvette. Tomorrow we leave for home. Make the arrangements please.‟



Tanya

301

Yvette would have expostulated, but one look at Tanya‟s pale set face,

and she left without a word.

Tanya could not sleep at all that night, and next morning, she sat

unmoving in a chair whilst the household scurried around, packing up

belongings and making ready for the departure. She knew she should ask

the King‟s permission to leave, but did not care. All she wanted to do was get

away.

The journey was a nightmare, for the weather had broken, and the

roads were pitted, the rain falling unceasingly all the way. Tanya refused to

stop anywhere, sleeping in the coach, delaying only when they had to

change horses.

Yvette did not dare to speak; she had never seen her mistress look so

strange. Her kind heart bled for her, but she was frightened to speak and sat

as still as Tanya, huddled miserably in the corner. Tanya looked out at the

leaden skies and the soaking rain, the weather matching her mood.

At last, the tired horses pulled the mud-bespattered coach up the

sweeping driveway of her Chateau, and she was home.

For a week, she wandered around the great house like a lost soul,

unable to snap herself out of her misery. Unable even to go out riding

because of the dreadful weather, she was trapped inside the lonely ho use.

She felt as if she must go mad soon if she could not wipe away the memory

of Ivan‟s cold eyes, and his beloved voice, naming her whore.

At night, she tossed and turned, unable to sleep, and dark shadows

appeared under her eyes. She couldn‟t eat, and she began to look so thin

and ill that Yvette flung herself at her mistress‟s feet, weeping.



Tanya

302

„Madame, pray do not. You will kill yourself if you go on so. Forgive me,

but I can‟t bear it to see you like this.‟

Tanya looked down at the girl and sighed.

„God‟s truth, Yvette, but I have not much taste for living.‟

That night, as she lay sleepless as usual, she heard a strange sound.

At first, she didn‟t take any notice, but the scrabbling grew louder, and she

sat up in bed, her heart thumping. The scraping was outside her window!

She heard a thump on the balcony outside and , quite suddenly, decided that

she did, after all, wish to live. Was it a thief, or someone sent to kill her? She

slipped out of bed and, grasping her heavy candlestick, crept to the window,

holding it high, ready to crash down on the unknown‟s head.

The casement creaked open, and a dark head peered round.

Tightening her grip on the candlestick, she had almost begun to swing it

down when a voice called softly. „Mademoiselle Tanya, are you there?‟ With

an exclamation she stepped back. „Who is there?‟ she called sharply. „Who is

it?‟

„Peterkin.‟

It was so unexpected a reply that Tanya dropped the candlestick.

„It is I, Peterkin. Forgive me coming in this way, but I had to see you.‟

„Peterkin! Is it really you?‟

The dark figure stepped into the room, and Tanya ran to the bed and lit

the lamp. She turned and, for a moment, thought she had been tricked. The

tall young man standing there could not be Peterkin. The small,

undernourished urchin bore no resemblance at all to this dark-haired,

decidedly attractive boy standing before her. Then he smiled, and she ran

forward, throwing herself into his arms.



Tanya

303

„Peterkin, it‟s really you. Oh, I can‟t believe it! I thought you must be

dead. I could find no trace of you at all after you had so bravely rescued me

from the Kremlin. I thought you must have been captured and probably killed.

Whatever are you doing here? Oh, I‟m so glad to see you.‟

She suddenly became aware of her scanty attire, and the fact that the

young man‟s face was suffused with blushes. With a shaky laugh she

released him, and picking up her wrap, slipped it on.

„But where has my little urchin gone? You have grown so, you are quite

a man. I don‟t understand this at all.‟

Peterkin laughed. „It‟s quite simple really, Tanya. I‟m here with Count

Ivan.‟ He noticed the shadow pass over Tanya‟s face but continued

imperturbably.

„I have been with Count Ivan ever since you last saw me.‟ He caught

her hands impulsively. „Oh, Tanya, he has been so good to me, what you

see before you now is all his making. I should be nothing without him – in

fact, by all accounts I should be dead, for had he denounced me after your

escape from the Kremlin, as I was quite sure he would, there would have

been no mercy for me. He has never told me why he covered for me,

although I have my own ideas about that.‟ He glanced at her face from under

his lashes, to find her beautiful, expressive eyes fixed on him with almost

painful intensity.

„Tell me everything, Peterkin, from when we left you tied up in the cell,‟

she cried, pulling him over to the bed to sit down. With just a trace of

embarrassment, he perched himself on the edge of the frilled counterpane.

„Well, only minutes after you and Nicholas had left, the Count came in

and found me. It was the most awful luck, for you had hardly had time to get



Tanya

304

away. I have never seen anyone look so thunderstruck in all my life, when he

pulled back the covers and saw me lying there all trussed up, instead of you.

Well, he dashed off, leaving the guards to deal with me, and I was sure that I

was as good as dead, for there was no doubt that the Count had recognised

me – he had seen me with you only a short time before. I only found out later

what had happened when he caught up with you, and how poor Nicholas

was killed.‟

Tanya‟s eyes flew to his face. „It was all my fault, you know,‟ she said

in a small, choked voice. „It was I who really killed him.‟

Peterkin looked shocked.

„Don‟t say that, Tanya. It was just a terrible tragedy. No one was to

blame really. I think he was probably happier dying for you, you know,

because he loved you so much, and you could never have returned that love

in the way he wanted. ’

Tanya looked at him with tears in her eyes. „ I hope you are right,

Peterkin, how I hope you are right. If you only knew how many, many times I

have gone over that dreadful night in my mind, trying to see how I could have

averted all that happened without either of them getting hurt.‟ She shook

herself and forced a wavering smile .

‘ I‟m sorry. Go on, Peterkin, tell me what happened next.‟

„Well, after a long while, what seemed like a lifetime, the Count came

back. He looked dreadful, like death, all white faced and with blood caked on

his head. He questioned me over and over on where you might ha ve gone,

but in the end, I think he believed that I had no idea. You can imagine my

surprise when, instead of having me flung in prison, or put to death, he

backed up my story, and took me on in his household as a clerk. He has



Tanya

305

been so very good to me – educated me and put great trust in me with his

affairs. I‟m his secretary, now that he has been made Russian Ambassador

to France.‟

Tanya shook her head in wonderment, then asked, almost painfully.

‘ And has he been happy these past years – he . . . he, hasn‟t married, has

he?‟

Peterkin shook his head emphatically. „No, he has taken very little

interest in women at all. For a while, after you left, he went through a series

of affairs, all with foreign married women, but none of them brought him any

happiness, and after a while, they faded out. He seemed pretty cut up for a

long time after you escaped, hardly spoke to anyone, even me, although

sometimes he would come to my room and ask me questions about you –

who you were, and where you had come from. I never told him much, for the

story you had divulged to me was not mine to tell. After a while, he stopped

coming and would only talk to me of business. He paid for a good funeral for

Nicholas, you know, and seemed to be genuinely sorry for what had

happened. I don‟t believe he meant to kill him, you know .’

„Did he ever tell you what really happened that night?‟ asked Tanya.

Peterkin shook his head. „No, but I guessed.‟

Tanya told him, quietly, her voice trembling a little. „And do you know,

Peterkin, that just before I knocked him out, I told him I loved him! I must

have been mad, for it‟s obvious he feels nothing but scorn and hate for me.‟

„That‟s not true,‟ cried Peterkin quickly. „If that was the case, why has

he been trying so hard to find you, ever since you disappeared? He had half

his men scouring Moscow for you for weeks, until he was forced to give up.

Then, about a year after your escape, a man turned up, demanding to see



Tanya

306

the Count. He was turned away several times, apparently, but waylaid us

one day as we were entering the house and mentioned your name. The

Count had him inside in an instant, firing questions at him. He said he had

worked as a groom for a merchant, Olaf Brovski, but had fallen on hard

times. He had seen one of the reward posters that had been hung around

the town and, although the surname was different, decided the description

could fit no one but you. He described how the merchant, at your instigation,

had despatched him to Moscow to trace a street urchin by the name of

Peterkin, but he had had no luck. Of course, we knew then that it had to be

you, and I had never seen the Count look so alive, somehow. The man was

unable to tell us any more, having left the merchant‟s employ some time

before, but the Count slipped him a fat purse and started shouting orders to

prepare for a journey before he had left the room! Well, we rode off hell for

leather to Yaroslavl. I had a hard job keeping up with the Count, I can tell

you, he rode like a madman. We changed horses at every post house, I think

we must have broken every record, the miles we covered every day.

Unfortunately, however, when we arrived, we found the house all shut up,

with only a housekeeper and a few servants there. She said the merchant

had died, and his ward had left just recently – where to, she didn‟t know.

Count Ivan offered her anything she wanted if she would tell him, but she

insisted she had no idea, only that you had gone on a long journey. The

Count asked her what had been your relationship with the merchant, with

such a queer, strained look on his face, but when the old woman told him

you had been just like a daughter to him and made him very happy over the

last few months of his life, his face sort of lit up. We even dug out an old

apothecary whom she thought might have some idea of your whereabouts –



Tanya

307

and I still swear the old rascal knew – but he wouldn‟t open his mouth either.

The Count was fuming mad, I can tell you, but we could do no more,

because we had to return to Moscow on the Tsar‟s orders. We have been on

a few campaigns with the Tsar since then, then eventually we were sent here

to Paris – and here, of all places, we find you!‟

Tanya sat quite breathless, hope and doubt mingling in her mind, trying

to sort out her jumbled thoughts. Why had Ivan gone hot-foot in pursuit of her

– what emotion had driven him – love, or hate? Perhaps his pride had been

dealt a blow when she had escaped, and he had sworn to recapture her and

have her sentence carried out! But would even that goal have caused him to

act as he had? Hope began to dawn a little in her. Could it be possible that

Ivan did care for her, if just a little? Could it be that he was jealous, which

would explain his fury when seeing her with the King? Was it possible?

„Oh, Peterkin, I‟m so glad you came to see me,‟ she cried at last. „I‟ve

been so miserable. Did Ivan tell you what happened when we met at

Versailles?‟

„No,‟ he admitted. „He came home looking like a thundercloud, and I

didn‟t dare open my mouth at first. But he must have known I was wondering,

and he knew I had been very unhappy because we never found out what had

become of you, and he eventually informed me in the sort of way that

brooked no questions that you were in Paris, safe and well. I couldn‟t leave it

at that, so I asked around and found out that you were going under the name

of de la Verrière – your father‟s name as I later learnt. I just had to see you

again, so I asked for a few days leave of absence, found out where you were

living, and came down as fast as I could. I bribed the groom to tell me which

was your room – and here I am!‟



Tanya

308

„Oh, Peterkin, if you only knew how glad I am,‟ cried Tanya, and to his

dismay promptly burst into tears. Then, as she caught sight of the horrified

look on his face, laughed in spite of herself.

„Oh, Peterkin, what a fool you must think I am. But let me tell you the

whole.‟ She leaned back against the bedpost and lived again that dreadful

scene in the gardens at Versailles. Peterkin whistled.

„I didn‟t like to mention it, but the rumours are certainly flying around

that you either are or soon will be the King‟s mistress. I didn‟t believe it

myself, you‟re just not the type, but Ivan obviously did believe it – you can‟t

blame him really, after seeing you come out of that anteroom with the King.‟

Tanya laughed bitterly. „He‟s always ready to believe the worst of me,‟

she said. „If he only knew. I haven‟t let anyone touch me since he . . .‟ she

broke off and blushed. „But never mind that. It‟s good to see you again, I‟m

so glad you came. I‟m hiding myself away down here like a criminal, but I

was so miserable.‟

„You‟re not the only one, Mlle Tanya‟ Peterkin informed her. „Count

Ivan‟s going around with a face like death, and it‟s rumoured the King is in a

rage because you left like you did.‟

„Oh dear,‟ sighed Tanya, but her heart lifted at the thought that

perhaps Ivan was a little unhappy because of her. She smiled sadly.

„Do you know, Peterkin, I once said that I thought I brought only trouble

and tragedy to those I love. I‟m beginning to think maybe I was right. One

after another, all the people I meet, and come to love, seem to be made

unhappy or die. Do you believe in fate over things like that? Better keep

away from me, Peterkin.‟



Tanya

309

„Nonsense,‟ he replied bracingly, giving her a little shake. „It‟s no

wonder you‟re getting these fantasies, shut away down here all alone. It‟s not

right that someone as vital and alive as you should be buried way out here

like you are.‟

He looked at her with compassion in his eyes. How thin and pale she

looked, so different from the young girl he had first met – then she had been

so full of life, fighting even though she had just lost everything. But he was

sure he knew the reason.

„You still love him, don‟t you?‟ he asked softly. „I‟ve known all along

that you did, it was plain for any fool to see – any fool but Count Ivan, it

seems! I‟ve never known two people make such a fuss over the simple

matter of being in love. Yes, Tanya, I‟m as sure that he loves you as that you

love him, but you‟ve made a fine mess of things between you. Well, I shall

have to take a hand. I‟m not exactly sure how, mind, but you two people

mean more to me than anyone in the world, if it wasn‟t for you two, I‟d still be

rotting in the gutters of Moscow. I mean to repay you both somehow.‟

He broke off as he caught sight of the look of blazing joy on Tanya‟s

face and hoped that his instincts had not played him false in telling her of the

Count‟s love for her, of which he was almost certain. He had been with the

Count for a long time now, and you do not live in close proximity with a man

for a number of years without feeling that you know him, perhaps better than

he knows himself. He jumped to his feet, laughing.

„Anyway, enough of these long, serious speeches. I can‟t stay, I have

only enough time to ride straight back. The Count couldn‟t spare me for as

long as I wanted. I didn‟t have time to wait until morning to see you, hence



Tanya

310

my unusual method of entry.‟ He stretched and yawned. „Could you get me a

mug of ale, or something? It‟s a chilly night, and the way back is long.‟

„Oh Peterkin, of course. What a terrible hostess you must think me,‟

cried Tanya, springing to her feet. „I‟ll go down to the kitchens and find

something for you.‟

She flew downstairs as if wings were on her feet. Suddenly she felt

light-hearted and almost happy. Peterkin thought Ivan loved her! Could it be

true? He had never made any sign to her at all. True, he had been – still was

perhaps, physically attracted to her, but that was not love. She could not

bear to be just his plaything – possessor of his body, but not his heart. And

yet – if that was all he could give her, would she not take it and try to find

happiness?

She gathered together food and drink and hurried back upstairs. She

opened the door and stopped dead.

„Oh – Yvette.‟

The young maid swung round, her comely face scarlet.

„Oh, Madame, forgive me. I had no idea – that is, I thought I heard

voices and came to make sure you were all right.‟

„Dear Yvette, it‟s quite all right, it is really not as it appears. This young

man is an old, old friend – I knew him in Russia when he was still a child.

How old are you now, Peterkin?‟

„Seventeen, maybe eighteen, I‟m not quite sure, to be honest,‟ he

replied. „Before Count Dostoyevskiy took me in hand, I couldn‟t even read or

write, let alone speak French as I now do, so I certainly didn‟t know my age.

Anyway, I‟m not a child any more.‟

„No, we can see that, can‟t we, Yvette?‟ laughed Tanya.



Tanya

311

Yvette looked at her mistress wonderingly, then threw a warm glance

at Peterkin.

„I don‟t know who you are, sir, and I don‟t care – all I know is that

you‟ve worked wonders for my mistress. You‟ve put the colour back in her

cheeks and life back into her. Thank you.‟

Peterkin looked at her with new interest and bowed, hand over heart.

„Allow me to present myself, mademoiselle. My name is Peterkin – a

Russian by birth, though not by nature. I never had a second name – or

never knew it if I did, and to Mamselle Tanya I owe my life.‟

Tanya started forward and took his hands, „And you, dear friend,

repaid me doubly – by saving mine in my hour of need. That I shall never

forget. Now, eat.‟

Whilst Peterkin was wolfing down the food and drink, Tanya told

Yvette a little of their adventures together in Russia. The young girl listened

with eyes wide. „I‟ ve never heard the like,‟ she gasped. „I thought things like

that only happened in fairy stories. Oh, M‟sieur Peterkin, how brave you

were!‟

Since Yvette appeared to be quite overwhelmed by Peterkin‟s

prowess, Tanya leant back and watched the youngsters talking together, her

mind too full for words. At last, Peterkin jumped to his feet.

„I really must get back to Paris. Remember what I said, Tanya. I will try

to do something to help you and Count Ivan, but it won‟t be easy – he can be

a difficult man. I must choose my moment. The best thing for you to do for

the moment is to remain here. I will contact you when I can.‟



Tanya

312

„Thank you, Peterkin, I know I can trust you. But – one thing. Do not

beg for me – that I could never bear. If you could, perhaps, just find out what

his feelings are towards me – discreetly, of course. Oh, I don‟t know what to

think, what to do for the best. God speed you, Peterkin, and keep you safe.

You needn‟t go back down out of the window. Yvette will, I‟m sure, be

delighted to see you from the grounds. Farewell, good friend, I will await

some word from you here.‟

Smiling, she watched the young couple leave, then jumped into bed.

For the first time for years, she felt properly alive. Hope was springing in her,

and surely, when you have hope, you have everything.

Next morning found her walking in the grounds restlessly. The heavy

rain had stopped at last, and in accordance with her feelings, a watery sun

shone. She was completely lost in her thoughts when she was roughly

brought back to earth by Yvette‟s frightened face before her.

„Oh, M‟lle, there is a messenger here to see you. He‟s waiting in the

house. He wears the King‟s livery and demands your immediate presence.

He‟s covered in mud, and Jules says his horse is on its knees.‟ Tanya‟s heart

went cold. She had completely forgotten about the King. Peterkin had said

he was angry at her leaving. What could it mean? Surely she wasn‟t going to

be arrested again? She had gravely insulted Louis by leaving without his

permission. She followed Yvette back to the house and entered the room

indicated with fast-beating heart. A young man stood haughtily to attention

before her and bowed stiffly.

„Mademoiselle de la Verrière. I bear a message from his most Gracious

Majesty, Louis XIV, King of France.‟ He proffered a rolled parchment, staring

insolently at her in a way which made her hackles rise.



Tanya

313

Tanya took the parchment, glad that her hand was steady.

„I thank you, M‟sieur. May I offer you refreshment of some kind?‟

„Thank you, no. I must bear your answer straight back to the King. All I

crave is a fresh horse.‟

„Yes, yes, of course,‟ murmured Tanya absently and, seating herself in

a nearby chair, broke the seal and unrolled the parchment. The words written

on it danced before her eyes.

„His Gracious Majesty, Louis XIV of France commands the presence of

Mademoiselle de la Verrière at his Court. No permission was granted for her

to leave the Court, and His Majesty is gravely displeased. We shall expect

you to give our messenger the date upon which you will return to our Court.‟

It was signed by the King, and underneath, in his own handwriting, Louis had

written „Let it not be long.‟

Tanya stared dumbly at the words. What could she do? He was, after

all, her sovereign, for she was half French and had adopted that country as

her own. She had no choice but to obey. She looked up slowly.

‘ Te ll His Majesty I shall begin my journey tomorrow morning..‟

„Is that all?‟ asked the young man. „Shall you not write some sort of

reply? His Majesty will expect it.‟

„No, I shall not,‟ replied Tanya sharply, tired of this precocious youth.

„Except, perhaps, you may add that I am not impressed by the manners of

his servants. That is all.‟

The man flushed darkly and shot her a venomous look. He bowed

abruptly and left the room. Tanya was still sitting unmoving as the sound of

his horse‟s hooves faded into the distance. Then, with a sigh, she stood up



Tanya

314

and walked out into the hall. Yvette was hovering anxiously by the door.

Tanya smiled sadly.

„I‟m afraid we are off on our travels again, Yvette. Faith, but we shall

wear grooves in the road between here and Paris. Pack my things, will you,

and inform Jules. We must leave in the morning. The King commands my

presence at Court. See that the necessary orders are given, please.‟

Her shoulders bowed, Tanya crossed to the library, her favourite room

in the house. It was quiet and peaceful in there, and she needed to think.

What should her next course of action be? Louis was not just any man to

hold off easily with cold words and manner. True, he could not really force

her to become his mistress, but he could make life in this country impossible

for her, and she had nowhere else to go. She was tired of running away, tired

of fighting. Who knows, if Peterkin had not given her new hope, she might

even have given in – after all, to be mistress to a King was not to be scorned.

But now – she just couldn‟t. Whatever happened, whatever pressures were

brought to bear upon her, she would never give in. She had held on to her

love for Ivan as something pure and unsullied – something to cling to through

all she had borne. So she must keep her body pure for him – for him or no

one.

„And if he does not want you?‟ whispered a voice inside her. „What

then, Tanya, what then?‟ But she resolutely ignored the inner warning,

refusing to acknowledge the thought. He must want her – he had to, for if he

spurned her now, her life had no meaning at all!



Tanya

315





Chapter 12


Peterkin urged his tired horse on through the darkening streets of

Paris, towards his master‟s house. He wondered if Count Ivan would ask him

where he had been. If so, he could tell the truth, in part, and say he had

„been to see a lady‟. The Count would no doubt think what he was meant to

and ask no more. Peterkin thought of Yvette‟s pointed little face, and he

smiled inwardly. Perhaps he would not be far wrong?

He trotted in through the gates and handed his horse over to the

groom, then hurried in through the side door, and up to his room. As he

changed his dirty clothes, his mind was busy working out a way to broach the

matter foremost in his thoughts. Poor Tanya, how she had suffered in her

life! Surely if anyone deserved happiness, it was she. He was resolved,

somehow, to bring the two together. He had just finished dressing when

there was a knock on the door. Count Ivan‟s valet stood outside.

„Ah, Peterkin, you are returned. Good, good. The master has been

asking for you all evening. Can you go to him now?‟

„Of course, where is he?‟ answered Peterkin.

„Downstairs, in the library. Dinner will be served shortly, you‟d better

hurry.‟

Peterkin went quickly downstairs and knocked on the library door.

„Enter,‟ called the Count‟s voice, and Peterkin hurried inside.

„I‟m sorry I‟ve kept you waiting, sir. I have but this moment returned and

have come straight down.‟



Tanya

316

„Most thoughtful of you,‟ replied the Count dryly, and Peterkin‟s heart

sank at the sight of his stern, cold face. „May I enquire where you have

been?‟

Peterkin smiled nervously. „ To . . . to visit a lady, sir,‟ he replied.

The Count‟s eyebrows rose. „Indeed? Are you not a little, er, young?‟

„I‟m nearly eighteen, sir,‟ replied Peterkin stoutly. „Not so young really.‟

„And was it worth the long ride? I understand your horse was lathered

and spent.‟

„Oh yes, sir,‟ replied Peterkin eagerly, wondering how he had found that

out in so short a time. „Well worth it.‟ He smiled slyly, and the Count relaxed

a little.

‘ Ah well, I shouldn‟t blame you if you told me to go to the devil – though

I wouldn‟t recommend it. In fact, I almost envy you.‟ He stared broodingly in

front of him, then shrugged. „There is much work to be done. The Tsar has

sent an emissary with messages for the King. I must go straight to see His

Majesty, but the Tsar‟s messages, as usual, leave much to be desired.‟ He

tossed a bag across the table, full of jumbled papers. „Can you be a good lad

and sort that lot out – make it look presentable if you can? Nothing very

interesting, just the usual interminable haggling over monies and lands. Can

you bring it back to me here in an hour?‟

The door closed behind Peterkin, and Ivan sighed, leaning back in his

chair wearily.

„Damn the woman,‟ he muttered under his breath and reached for the

bottle of brandy at his side. He had had enough to drink, he knew, but didn‟t

care. For over a week, he had been trying to erase from his mind the sight of

Tanya‟s white face, her lovely eyes hurt and brimming with tears, as he had



Tanya

317

seen her last. He gritted his teeth and jumped to his feet, pacing the room

restlessly. What was it about her that he couldn‟t forget her? From the first

moment he had seen her, when she was the Princess Mensherikovsky, wife

of his enemy, it had been as though he were bewitched. He had fought it, for

she had been the wife of a traitor – perhaps even a traitor herself, though he

doubted it somehow, she was not the sort for po litical scheming. At night,

when he tried to sleep, his body would ache with desire when he

remembered that magic night in the sordid room in the Kremlin. He would

remember how badly he had treated her, how he had left her in that terrible

dungeon. He still burned with shame when he thought of it. He had tried to

convince himself he hated her, had lashed her with insults on almost every

occasion they had met, and yet still he could not put her out of his mind. He

had gone to her in her cell and made love to her there in the hope that it

would exorcise her from his thoughts, prove her to be just another woman,

and yet the effect had been the opposite. And now, when he had thought to

come to France and start a new life away from Moscow and memories of

her, he found her shamelessly flaunting herself with the King, the one man

he was powerless to fight. Her words still echoed in his mind. „After all, what

is a body for? It is a lovely body, isn‟t it Ivan? Remember?‟

Remember! How could he forget? God knows, he had tried. He had

thrown himself into his work, doing enough for two men. He had involved

himself with several women, but they did not help either. In fact, they made it

worse, for they were not she, and he would find himself comparing them with

her unfavourably. He clenched his hands until a sudden crack brought him

back to the present, and he stared in bewilderment at the shattered glass in

his hand. Even Peterkin, it seemed, had more luck than he. With an



Tanya

318

impatient shrug, he threw the pieces of glass into the grate and bound his

handkerchief round his hand. He had finished the brandy bottle when

Peterkin returned with the papers, sorted and ready for the King. Peterkin

looked at him anxiously, eyeing the empty bottle.

„Pardon me, sir, but . . . are you going to the King now?‟

„Yes,‟ snapped Ivan and laughed bitterly. „Don‟t worry, Peterkin, I‟m not

drunk – though sometimes I wish to God I were.‟

He left the room, and Peterkin sighed, shaking his head. It looked as

though his self-imposed task was going to be more difficult than he had

anticipated.

How much more difficult he was soon to find out. A week later, his

master returned from the Court, his face glowering with rage. Peterkin

ventured to ask what was amiss and almost got his head snapped off.

„If you must know, your precious Tanya, the strumpet, is back. I thought

she wouldn‟t be able to stay away for long. It made me sick to see the King

fawning all over her – at his age too, he should be ashamed. Anyway, I

should have thought he would have had better taste than a whore like her.‟

„What?‟ exclaimed Peterkin in consternation, discounting the last piece

of this impassioned speech. „But she promised . . .‟ he broke off, scarlet, and

Ivan rounded on him.

„Not you too, by, God. Is she cradle snatching now? Was that where

you went for your amorous adventure?‟

„No, sir, no,‟ cried Peterkin in distress. „At least, yes, that was where I

went, but I didn‟t . . . as if you could think she would look at me in that way. I

went to see her maid, Yvette.‟



Tanya

319

„Then why all the secrecy?‟ demanded Ivan. „And you did see her too,

admit it.‟

„Yes, sir, of course I did. She‟s . . . she‟s like a sister to me. I love her

as a sister, and she looks on me only as a friend. You must know that, sir.

Her heart, I know, belongs to only o ne person, for she honoured me with her

confidence.‟

„Indeed?‟ jeered Ivan. „I only hope he knows what to do with it. Heart

indeed! I don‟t believe she has one.‟

Peterkin took a deep breath. The time, although not chosen by him,

was undoubtedly now.

„It is not to His Majesty that I refer, sir. You must forgive me for my

effrontery, but as one who loves you both, you must make allowances for my

frankness. The lady Tanya did, once, I believe, tell you that she loved you.‟

„Yes and split my head open afterwards for all that,‟ interrupted the

Count wryly.

„True, but the circumstances being what they were, one could hardly

blame her,‟ countered Peterkin. „Well, sir, she told me that she still feels the

same towards you – has always felt the same since she first saw you –

although she believes it to be hopeless, indeed, thinks that you hate and

revile her. She made me promise not to tell you anything of our conversation.

Well, I break that promise now, and with a clear conscience. The poor little

thing was pining away down there. Her heart was breaking when she told me

what happened at Versailles.‟

„By God, is there anything you don‟t know,‟ thundered the Count, his

eyes kindling.



Tanya

320

Peterkin stood his ground. „Very little, sir. In fact, begging your pardon,

I seem to know a deal more about it than you.‟

„Now you go too far,‟ cried Ivan, losing his temper. „You must know,

then, that she admitted to my face she was the King‟s mistress – even

revelled in it.‟

„She lost her temper, sir, that‟s all. Don‟t we all at some time or

another?‟ he added, eyeing his master‟s angry face. „She said the first thing

that came into her head. Of course, she isn‟t the King‟s mistress, she

couldn‟t be, she‟s not the type. I‟m not saying that he isn‟t putting every

pressure on her to become so, but she won‟t. Why, she swore to me she had

not let a man touch her since . . .‟ he broke off, colouring. „Well, that‟s neither

here nor there. The thing is, I believed every word she said and would stake

my soul on her honesty and goodness.‟

„Peterkin,‟ the Count spoke with deadly calm, and the boy wilted

visibly. „I shall ignore the insolence you have shown in speaking to me as

you have done – no doubt your motives are the best, but tell me one thing. If

what you say is true, why has she come back to Court – back to the King?‟

Peterkin looked down at his feet and shook his head miserably.

„I don‟t know, sir. She told me she was going to stay at her country

estate until I – that is . . .‟ he trailed off and shot an anxious look at the

Count.

„Until you had talked me into going to her? Is that it? I am not such a

fool, believe me.‟

„No, no, it was not like that at all. She made me promise not to plead

for her with you – she‟s too proud for that. I‟ve made a mess of everything,

and I wanted so much for you both to be happy.‟



Tanya

321

Ivan‟s face softened, and he clapped Peterkin on the shoulder.

„It‟s not your fault, lad, you‟ve just been deceived in her that‟s all. You

are not the first, and you won‟t be the last to be taken in by a pretty face.‟

Peterkin‟s head shot up. „No,‟ he said fiercely. „It‟s you who have been

deceived, not I. One day you will learn the real truth – the truth she told to

me, in a squalid little hovel in the slums of Moscow. I was only a child and

didn‟t understand then all her story. But I do now. It is not mine to tell you,

but perhaps, one day, you may know the grave injustice you do her. I only

hope and pray, for both your sakes, that it will not then be too late.‟

He bowed stiffly and, without awaiting permission, almost ran from the

room.

Ivan stared after him blindly, then sank down into a chair and buried

his face in his hands. Then, with an impatient exclamation, he strode out into

the hall, snatched his cloak and hat from the startled footman hovering there ,

and, without even calling for his coach, disappeared into the darkness of the

Paris streets.

Two hours later, he emerged from yet another dingy tavern and stood

swaying in the doorway. He had consumed far more than was usual for him,

and the raw spirit made his brain seem to work more slowly. He gazed

around uncertainly, then his eyes fell on the lighted windows of another

tavern, just across the road, and walking over, he pushed the door open and

entered. By now, his appearance caused no comment, for his fine shirt was

soiled and his cloak muddied. Apart from a few casual glances, his entry

went unnoticed. He sat down at a corner table and focused his tired eyes

across the smoke-filled room. An old man served him, puffing away at a

revolting looking pipe. He poured out a drink and, tossing it back, leaned



Tanya

322

back in his chair, passing his hand across his eyes. Slowly, the conversation

that was being held at the next table penetrated his consciousness.

„What do their sort care for us, eh, answer me that?‟ shrilled a hideous

old crone, her clawed fingers clenched around her glass. „Hangers on, the lot

of ‟em, idling away their lives while the rest of us slave to keep them. The

King, now, God bless ‟im, he‟s God‟s anointed after all.‟ She sniffed and spat

sideways on to the floor. „And the Queen, misused, that‟s what she was, God

rest her soul. One after the other he‟s had. Surprised he ain‟t done himself in,

flogging away all night, and all day too, wouldn‟t be surprised. You‟d think he

was past it now, wouldn‟t you? There he was, settled down all lovey-dovey

with the Scarron widow, when along comes the new piece and upsets it all.‟

She cackled hideously. „She‟s still ‟olding him off, though.‟

Ivan‟s head swung round sharply, and he almost dropped his glass.

„Who do you mean, the Russian wench?‟ asked the crone‟s

companion, an unsavoury looking character with only one eye.

„None other,‟ replied the hag. „My niece‟s daughter works in the palace

kitchens, and there‟s not nothing that she don‟t know before all them fine

lords and ladies. Ah well, unless he‟s changed, it won‟t be for long. In the old

days, once he got his eye on a wench, there was no holding him. He was in

a fine rage when she ‟opped it into the country – he sent a messenger out

after her, according to Megs, who ain‟t often wrong, I may add. Seems he

ordered her back, because she turned up a week later, and I‟m betting he‟s

getting his money‟s worth right now, if what they say about him‟s true.

Though what she wanted to run off for, I don‟t know, nor no one else, neither.

I mean, you don‟t pass up a chance like that, now do you?‟



Tanya

323

„Tell you what,‟ cried her companion, banging down his tankard. „Who‟ll

take a bet she‟s on her back for him right now – come on, who‟s betting?‟

He got no further, for he found himself lifted up by the greasy

handkerchief around his neck and shaken like a rat.

„Swine, filth,‟ shouted the Count, shaking him until his teeth rattled.

The old crone jumped to her feet, screeching. „Take your ‟ands off him,

get off. Hey, maties, lend an ‟and, old Jean‟s getting throttled.‟

Three large ruffians descended upon Ivan, and dropping the little man,

he turned, reaching for his sword. Cursing, he remembered he hadn‟t

bothered to put it on, and glancing swiftly round, snatched up a chair and

broke it across the head of the nearest man. All hell broke loose as men

began throwing wild punches, and fighting broke out all over the room. The

old hag was still yelling shrilly, until someone knocked her off her feet. Head

clearer now, Ivan began fighting his way over to the door. Someone‟s fist

caught him a glancing blow over the eye, then he was pulling the door open,

breathing the fresh night air thankfully. He staggered down a side alley and

was promptly sick. The bottle of brandy he had consumed earlier, coupled

with the cheap spirits he had been drinking , had just been too much. He

straightened up, ruefully fingering the bruise beginning to form over his eye.

He grinned to himself at the thought of the sight he must look and started off

in the direction of home. He was almost turned away by his own footman,

before the man recognised him. The sound of raised voices brought Peterkin

out into the hall. With a horrified exclamation, he started forward.

„Count, are you all right? Whatever‟s happened, was it footpads?‟

To his utter consternation, the Count doubled over and roared with

laughter.



Tanya

324

„Damn me, Peterkin, if you could just see your faces,‟ he gasped. „Do I

look that bad?‟

„Frankly, sir, yes,‟ replied Peterkin, grinning in sympathy. „Do come

upstairs, you‟ll have half the household thinking you‟ve run mad.‟ The Count

looked at him strangely.

„No, Peterkin, I think I have been mad, but I‟m not any more. Order a

bath for me, will you? God, but I stink.‟

Peterkin followed his master upstairs, his thoughts in a whirl. The

Count seemed to have shed years and was springing up the stairs two at a

time. He beckoned Peterkin to follow him into his chamber and began

stripping off his soiled and torn clothes. He looked across at the boy, and

Peterkin was taken aback by the look of blazing joy in his eyes. In all the time

he had known him, Peterkin had never seen him look like that.

„Aren‟t you going to ask me what I‟ve been doing?‟ he asked.

„If . . . if you want me to, sir,‟ replied Peterkin hesitantly.

„I‟ve been protecting a fair lady‟s good name, my lad.‟ He grinned

ruefully. „Apparently it‟s common knowledge even in the slums of Paris that

the King‟s latest love will have none of him. I was a fool not to listen to you,

but I won‟t make the same mistake again. It needed something like this to

bring me to my senses. Tomorrow, Peterkin, I go to Court – tomorrow I go to

her, if she‟ll have me.‟



* * * *

Tanya stood nervously in the ante chamber, waiting for the King to

come to her. She had been ordered here for this interview the same evening

she had arrived in Paris. She had barely had time to change her travelling

dress and tidy herself, before a coach arrived to take her to the King. Her



Tanya

325

thoughts were confused, and she felt tired out. Her hands were shaking, and

she clasped them together, he r shoulders drooping.

„What a picture of dejection,‟ said a dry voice behind her. „Is it so bad to

be summoned to your King?‟

Tanya turned slowly, feeling almost calm now. She curtsied low and

remained at his feet, head bowed. He reached down and raised her up,

retaining her hands.

„Tanya, Tanya,‟ he spoke caressingly. „Why did you run away like that?

You made me very angry you know. Do you not love your King?‟

„Of course, sire,‟ she answered softly. „Every good subject loves their

King.‟

He gave an impatient exclamation and, dropping her hands, began to

pace the room.

„Is there no getting through that barrier you have around you? What

must I do to make you look at me as a man? For I am a man, Tanya, and

one who loves and desires you. Aye, desire,‟ he repeated as she made an

involuntary movement away from him. „I meant to be cold and formal with

you, you know, but here I am, pleading like a lovelorn lad.‟ He pulled her

forward into his arms, gazing down at her passionately.

„I don‟t know what it is about you, but I only know I want you, I must

have you.‟ He put his hand under her chin, forcing her face up, then kissed

her, gently at first, then with mounting passion. She lay passive in his arms,

her lips cold as ice against his, then as his fingers began to fumble at her

bodice, she broke away, sobbing. He went white and drew back, head raised

haughtily.



Tanya

326

„Am I then so distasteful to you?‟ he asked harshly.

„No, sire, oh no. Please try to understand. If . . . if my heart were free,

Sire, I should give it to you gladly. My body, I cannot stop you taking, for

does it not belong to you? But my heart can never be yours.‟

He looked at her frowningly. „May I enquire the name of the fortunate

man?‟

„Oh, pray do not ask me, Sire. I can only tell you that the man in

question does not return my feelings.‟ Her voice trembled. „Indeed, I believe

he despises me, but still, I can never love another.‟ She turned to him

imploringly. „Try to have patience with me, dear Sire, for try as I can, I cannot

forget him.‟

Louis‟s face softened. „Poor child,‟ he said softly. „You almost make me

feel ashamed. Very well, I shall not press you, but mistake me not, I shall

have you in the end. I cannot force you to give me your body, that is not my

way, I want no unwilling mistress. Only know, I am not a patient man. I shall

wait a while and give you time. I wish you to remain here at Court.

Tomorrow, we hunt at Versailles, and I shall look for you there. You have our

permission to leave.‟

Tanya curtsied again and hurried from the room, hardly able to believe

her escape. She had thought herself lost, then, for if she became in truth

what Ivan had called her, she could not bear to live with herself. Her heart

heavy, she had her coach summoned and was soon alone in her room,

facing another sleepless night.

She arose at dawn, for to hunt with the King meant leaving very early.

She dressed herself carefully in a velvet habit of dull gold, somehow feeling



Tanya

327

that if she looked her best, she would be better able to face the day and what

it might bring. She took her open carriage, for the day was fine, the early

mists promising good weather to come. Her groom followed on her hunter,

and Yvette accompanied her in the carriage. The roads were very bad, and

the coach bumped and bounced over the ruts. Suddenly, there was a loud

crack, and the carriage lurched, toppling the occupants over. The wheel shaft

had snapped completely, leaving the carriage almost on its side in the ditch.

Cursing, the coachman looked over his shoulder.

„Begging your pardon, m‟lady, but I‟m afraid the wheel shafts broke.‟

„I can see that for myself, fool,‟ snapped Tanya, trying to calm a

hysterical Yvette, who had almost been thrown from the carriage. „Pull

yourself together, girl,‟ she cried, shaking her.

„Sorry, m‟lady, it frightened me awful.‟

„Is it repairable?‟ asked Tanya.

„‟Fraid not, m‟lady, not here anyways,‟ replied the coachman, shaking

his head dolefully.

„Well, don‟t sit there like an idiot, unharness the horses. My groom and

Yvette can ride those back – you can walk,‟ she said callously. „ I‟ll take my

hunter and go on to the hunt alone. Go on, now.‟

By the time she had seen the three off back on the road to Paris, the

hour was well advanced, and her temper thoroughly raised. She reached the

place where the hunt usually met, but there was no sign of anyone. Far in the

distance, she could hear a horn sounding and knew the hunt was already in

full cry. She felt not the slightest desire to chase after them and was about to

dismount and await their return when the sound of hooves, ga lloping fast,



Tanya

328

came to her ears. She swung round in the saddle and, in the distance, saw a

big chestnut bearing down on her. She felt no desire at all for company,

wishing only to be alone, so dug her heels into her horse‟s sides and

galloped off through the woods. She glanced over her shoulder and saw her

pursuer gaining on her. She felt strangely exhilarated by the chase and

urged her mount recklessly on. She knew she was going too fast over the

thickly wooded ground, but her blood was up. She could faintly hear a voice

shouting behind her, but merely laughed, then next moment, her horse

somehow stumbled, and suddenly, she was flying through the air. Her breath

was knocked out of her, and she was stunned by the fall, but luckily, she had

landed on thick, soft undergrowth, and so escaped injury. She tried to sit up

but went dizzy and sank back with a groan. The next moment, someone was

lifting her up in their arms and covering her face with kisses. She shrank

away dazedly, murmuring, „No, no, leave me alone, I am saving myself for

him.‟

„For . . . him?‟ asked a soft voice in her ear, and still half stunned,

Tanya replied, „Yes, for him, for the man I love – for Ivan.‟ Then she came to

her senses and struggled, trying to push the unknown away. She heard an

exultant laugh and, with an exclamation, opened her eyes. She found herself

staring up into Ivan‟s face, and his eyes were glowing with the look she had

yearned for from the first moment she had seen him – glowing with such a

tender love that her heart turned over in her breast. For a moment, she

thought she was dreaming and put up a trembling hand to touch his face.

„Yes, my love, ‟tis I. I have come to my senses at last. I have wasted

so much of our lives – can you find it in your heart to forgive me, can we start



Tanya

329

all over again, Tanya? Will you have me, after the way I have treated you

and hurt you?‟

Her eyes lit up with such a blaze of joy that his breath caught in his

throat, and with a strangled cry, he lifted her up high against his heart and

kissed her gently, then more and more urgently. Tanya‟s heart felt as though

it would burst with joy. She could scarcely believe that this was not another

of her dreams, when he held her in his arms and kissed her like this. But it

was too real, too beautiful to be a dream. With a shaky laugh, she held his

face in her hands, gazing adoringly up at him.

„Ivan, Ivan, what are you doing here, of all places? And why have you

changed your mind about me? The last time we met . . .‟ she broke off, and

her eyes clouded over. He put his fingers over her mouth, shaking his head.

„Do not speak of that awful night. We will never mention it again. I must have

been mad, I think I have been mad all my life until now. The reason I am

here is to find you, to tell you that I love you, that I have always loved you. I

almost admitted it once, that night in Moscow when you escaped. I was

ready then to give up everything to take you away to safety, but you were

gone before I had the chance. I wouldn‟t admit it to myself before, but I know

it now.‟

He kissed her again, fiercely, demandingly, and, her senses

swimming, Tanya gave herself up to him for the second time in her life. But

how much more beautiful it was this time, here in the fresh air and sunshine,

with love in their hearts. They gave themselves to each other completely,

revelling in the delights of love, and afterwards, held tight in her lover‟s arms,

Tanya felt so deliriously happy, it almost frightened her. Surely such

happiness was not for this world?



Tanya

330

Far away in the distance, a hunting horn sounded and brought them

back to their surroundings. With a shaky laugh, she sat up, straightening her

tumbled clothes, blushing like a young girl.

„Oh Ivan, we must be mad, making love in the King‟s forest, with the

hunt going on around us.‟

He jumped up, and pulling her to her feet, swung her up in his arms.

„Maybe so, my love. Let me take you away from it all – from the forest, and

the King.‟

She glanced nervously up at him, afraid to see the grim look back in his

eyes, but he was smiling gently at her. „Never fear, sweet Tanya, I know you

are blameless. One day, I shall tell you how it all came about, as I hope you

will tell me the story that Peterkin knows, and I do not. But for the present, I

want to take you away, somewhere where we can be completely alone, can

get to know one another all over again. And there is nothing – nothing at all

that I do not wish to know about you.‟ His eyes lingered on her with an

expression that made her blush again, then he swung her up on his horse

and mounted behind her. „We had better find your horse, we can scarcely

ride all the way back to Paris like this – though I feel I could ride to the ends

of the earth with you clasped in my arms this way.‟

They found Tanya‟s horse grazing not far away, and luckily he seemed

to be unhurt. She mounted, and together they rode out of the forest, and

back along the road to Paris. A s they reached the outskirts, they slowed

their horses to a walk.

„Unfortunately, my duties as ambassador preclude any hope of us going

off somewhere together, my love,‟ said Ivan quietly. „But – would it be

presumptuous of me to hope that I may come to you whenever I can?‟



Tanya

331

She clasped the hand he held out to her and smiled tremulously. „Surely

you need not ask that question, Ivan. You know the answer already. I can

never be happy again if I am separated from you. But there will be trouble

from the King. I rode to the hunt on his orders, and I may as well tell you that

last night he . . . I, well, he tried once again to make me become his mistress.

I managed to hold him off by telling him that my heart belonged to someone

else, and that I could never give it to him.‟ She gave him a warm look and

smiled shyly. „You will know now of whom I was speaking. But – oh Ivan, I‟m

afraid. He says he will wait, but that he always gets what he wants in the

end, and that he will have me. What shall we do?‟

He gazed frowningly ahead. „Play it by ear, I think,‟ then he scowled

suddenly.

„For once in his life, His Majesty will find that he does not get what he

wants, King or no King. You are mine from now on, and nobody else‟s. We

will find a way, never fear. I think the best thing to do is to continue on as you

are, giving as little encouragement as possible and keeping out of his way as

much as you can. I have come to know Madame de Maintenon quite well

during my visits to the Court, and I think a quiet word in her ear may yet help

us considerably. She still has a tremendous amount of influence with the

King, who I am sure still loves her. After all, it is in her interests too to detach

the King from your side. If I tell her just as much as she needs to know, I

think she may just work this thing out for us. You leave it to me, my love. You

need never be afraid of anyone or anything any more, now I am here to look

after you.‟

So began for Tanya a time of such happiness that sometimes she would

feel that it was all too much, that such an idyllic existence could not last, then



Tanya

332

she would feel the old fears creeping upon her again. But as soon as she

was with Ivan, held safe in his arms, they would disappear like the early

morning mists. She had waited too long for happiness, had it snatched from

her grasp so many times, that she lived each day as though it were her last,

made each meeting with her lover like the first. It seemed they could never

tire of one another – each was miserable when apart from the other, and

people who before had admired Tanya, now had their breath taken away by

the sheer, glowing joy that made her, if possible, twice as lovely as before.

She still had to make appearances at Court, of course, and they even had to

meet and, perforce, act as strangers at Court, for they dared not let Louis

know of how things stood between them. Ivan had let Madame de Maintenon

into their secret, but she, apart from Peterkin and Yvette of course , was the

only one who knew. That she had had words with the King was evident, for

although Louis still obviously admired Tanya, he had not again attempted to

get her alone, and some of his first passion seemed to have spent itself. He

spent more time with his morganatic wife, and the courtiers began to

exchange glances, and simper behind their hands when Tanya passed,

whispering that she had not been able after all to snare the King. Tanya,

however, was not even aware of their existence, so wrapped up was she in

her new-found happiness. Only one small cloud marred the horizon of her

love. Not once had Ivan mentioned marriage. She told herself that of course,

in their present position it was impossible, but nevertheless, the tiny doubt

nagged at the back of her mind, marring a little the exquisite joy of those

months together. Neither had she yet brought herself to tell Ivan the full story

of her background before they met. She knew she was being foolish and

longed to tell him everything, to hold nothing back, but always at the back of



Tanya

333

her mind, she would remember the scorn that had been in his eyes the many

times they had rested on her before, and she would hold back. Apart from

this, they had grown as close as any two people can, and Peterkin and

Yvette, who were themselves falling in love, would smile to see them so

happy together.

So, Paris sweltered through the long, hot summer, and as autumn was

turning the leaves russet and gold, Tanya realised with a slight sense of

shock, but overall an intense joy, that she was expecting Ivan‟s child. Her

first instinct was to rush straight into his arms and tell him the news; then she

realised that he would be bound then to ask her to marry him for the sake of

the child, and pride held her back . She told herself she would wait just a little

longer, hoping that he would mention the matter of his own free will. Day

after day, she would steel herself to break the news to him, but somehow

she could never bring herself to do so. Ivan, sensing somethi ng was

troubling her would press her to tell him what it was ; then she would shake

her head and laugh, drawing him down into her arms so that neither could

think of anything but each other.

Autumn ended abruptly with a cold, northerly wind that swept through

Paris, scattering the leaves and sending the Parisians scuttling indoors to the

warmth of their firesides. Tanya‟s pregnancy was into its third month, but she

looked and felt no different – indeed, she had never felt healthier in her life,

and, but for the nagging worry and doubt of Ivan‟s ignorance, would have

been deliriously happy. Now, Tanya was sitting quietly in her bedroom,

awaiting Ivan. The air was chilly, and she shivered a little and leaned nearer

the fire. Tonight she had come to a decision and, for the first time in months,

felt at peace. Tonight, she would tell Ivan about their child and leave him to



Tanya

334

do whatever he wished. She couldn‟t put off telling him for much longer, and

she loved him too much to withhold the news any more.

Her heartbeat quickened as she heard his familiar step on the stairs,

and she looked towards the door, smiling. In two strides, he was across the

room and, gathering her in his arms, buried his face in the fragrance of her

hair. Straight away, so that she would not lose courage, she stroked his head

and whispered „Sweetheart, I have something to tell you.‟

He raised a face clouded with grief and grimaced. „I hope it‟s better than

the news I have for you, my angel. Tell me.‟

Her heart went cold, and she stared down at him with troubled eyes.

„What can you mean? You have bad news? Quickly, what is it?‟

He passed a hand over his eyes and quietly replied. „An escort of

soldiers arrived today from the Tsar, bringing with them my successor.‟

Face pale, scarcely understanding, she looked at him wildly. „Your

successor?‟ she whispered.

He took both her hands in his. „Yes, my sweet. The Tsar, it seems, has

other uses for me and has sent a new ambassador for France. I am to return

with the escort immediately.‟

Tanya leaned back in her chair, her face chalk white. Floods of

faintness and nausea swept over her until the room seemed to be receding.

The shock was so great, she could hardly control her whirling brain. Far, in

the distance, she could hear Ivan‟s voice anxiously calling her name, and

somehow she forced herself to lean forward, putting her head on her knees.

The blood flowed back, and her senses returned. She raised a shaking hand

to her head and, to her surprise, found her forehead was drenched with



Tanya

335

sweat. Ivan‟s worried face swam into her vision, and she forced herself to

smile.

„I‟m so sorry, Ivan – the shock. No, no, I‟m all right – go on, please.‟

He regained her hands, shaking his head. „What a brute I am, breaking

it so badly. I thought it would be better over quickly. The Tsar, it seems, has

made up his mind to drive the Swedes from Muscovy. The interminable war

drags on and on. Tsar Peter has sworn that before next winter comes, he will

take Narva, the town where he had his last dreadful defeat. He‟s never

forgotten – or forgiven. I believe he wants me to go and take a look around

the place – test out the ground, I‟m not sure. The thing that really matters,

Tanya, is that there are two courses open to me. One means parting for a

short time, the other means we stay together. I am going to outline each

plan, and you will decide which it is to be. I leave it entirely to you.‟

She nodded, eyes fixed on his face. „Go on.‟

„The first,‟ he continued „is for me to give the escort the slip, come for

you, and together we‟ll fly wherever fortune leads us. It would mean neither

of us could ever return to Russia again,‟ his eyes clouded a little, „but we

would always have each other. You understand what you would be giving up

if you came with me? We should have to live very quietly for a long time – as

long as the Tsar‟s memory, and he does not easily forgive.‟

Tanya nodded again. „I understand. And the other plan?‟

„Would be for you to come with me as far as the border. There I would

leave you somewhere safe, with Peterkin and Yvette to look after you whilst I

journeyed to Moscow, to see the Tsar, and to beg him to let me bring you

back into Russia. After all, it was never proved that you had anything to do

with the Mensherikovsky plot.‟ He flushed and looked at her uncertainly. The



Tanya

336

name hovered in the room, drawing, for a moment an invisible barrier

between them. Tanya smiled sadly.

„Although you may find it difficult to believe, I really knew very little of

what went on in that unhappy man‟s mind. I really was very naive. After all,

not long before I had been living the life of a hermit in the middle of a

Swedish forest.‟ She flashed a quick look at him. „That was before I worked

as a kitchen maid.‟

She smiled mischievously at him as his eyes lit up with interest. How

little he knew of this fascinating woman who was now his whole life! What

hardships and trials had she undergone before she had arrived at the Court

of the Tsar as Princess Mensherikovsky? She had given him a sketchy

account of her life – he knew her father had been an aristocrat and that she

had relations here in Paris – had, in fact, met her uncle and cousin. She had

told him that much at their first meeting. He remembered her clearly, her

head flung back defiantly, eyes flashing. He had seen her as an enemy then.

How long ago it all seemed. He had never pressed her to tell him about

herself, he wanted her to take him into her confidence of her own accord.

One day, soon he hoped, she would do this. With a start, he wrenched his

mind back to the present.

„Some day you must tell me all about that. I really can‟t imagine you on

your hands and knees, scrubbing the kitchen floor. But to get back to our

present predicament;,if the Tsar agrees to your coming, I would either come

for you myself or send for you. If I cannot persuade him, I should at least

have tried and would then slip away at the first opportunity, come for you,

and we should follow the first plan anyway. Well, what do you think?‟



Tanya

337

Tanya sat silently, head bowed, her thoughts whirling. What should she

do? Of course, in her heart she knew already. She would go with him to the

border, and let him leave her there, whilst he went to the Tsar. She couldn‟t

be responsible for robbing the man she loved of his country, maybe even his

self-esteem, his whole life, in fact, until she had taken over a part of his

heart. She could imagine how the life he had described would irk him, always

so much the man of action. She knew that when he was not serving the Tsar

diplomatically, he was a very able soldier who had taken part in many battles

and risked his life for his master. Surely he would grow bitter, tied to her

apron strings, with no life other than with her. It just could not be. Of course,

telling him of the baby now was out of the question. The minute he knew, he

would refuse to leave her, of that she was sure. She raised her head and

smiled mistily at him.

„There is only one answer to give. You must, of course, go back to the

Tsar. I believe implicitly in your persuasive powers. The Tsar will agree, for

he both loves and trusts you, and knows your true worth.‟ She cupped his

face tenderly in her hands, and even through the tears in her eyes , she saw

the swift relief flash across his face, and she was glad she had made the

right choice.

He swept her into his arms, his face alight with joy. „I‟m sure the Tsar

bears you no ill will, Tanya, and will be glad for me to bring you to his Court.‟

His eyes softened, and taking her hand, he gently kissed her palm. „As my

wife, of course,‟ he added softly.

For a moment, Tanya could hardly believe her ears. That the words she

had longed to hear over the past happy months should now be uttered at a



Tanya

338

time of sadness, of looming parting was ironic, indeed. Then all other

considerations fled, and her heart flooded over with joy.

„Oh, Ivan,‟ she whispered, drawing him down into her arms. „Yes, yes, a

thousand times, yes.‟



Tanya

339





Chapter 13


A bitter north wind whipped Tanya‟s skirts around her ankles and caused her

to snuggle more deeply into her fur-lined cloak. A few snowflakes swirled through the

air and snow crunched under their feet as Ivan and Tanya entered the small chapel

at the border town of Tchernigov in Poland.



After a journey that had started with Tanya slipping away secretly to join Ivan,

for fear of the King perhaps attempting to stop her, and that had taken much longer

than anticipated due to the early snows and bad condition of the roads, they had

finally arrived the day before at the little hamlet. Ivan had made enquiries straight

away, and the priest, whose flock usually consisted of peasants and farmers, had

eagerly agreed to marry them the following day.



That night, as they had lain in each other‟s arms, he had talked to her of his

estates just outside Moscow, of the old rambling house that had been in his family for

generations, and of what their life would be like there together. Later, he had shown

her a beautiful gold ring, set all round with tiny emeralds.



„It belonged to my mother,‟ he said softly. „It always goes to the bride of the

family. Tomorrow I shall put it on your finger.‟



Tanya had felt quite choked with emotion and longed to tell him of the child

she carried within her then but knew that should she do so, he would never leave her

now, so she must wait until he had seen the Tsar, and she was with him again as his

wife. Although into her fifth month, she was stil hardly showing and had had no

problems with the pregnancy at al, she had just rounded out and somehow become

more of a woman, less of the girl she had left behind.



And now here they were, together in the icy chapel. As if in a dream, Tanya

heard Ivan‟s voice uttering the responses, then her own clear tones echoed in the



Tanya

340

cold air. Next moment, Ivan was slipping the ring on her finger, and the priest was

announcing them man and wife. As they signed their names, she could not help but

compare this simple, quiet ceremony with the one that had taken place at the Sudzal

Convent, when instead of the cheerful, homely face of the priest here she had been

faced by the dreadful countenance of Father Stevanov, and the beloved hand she

now held had been that of a man she both feared and distrusted. In what turmoil had

her thoughts been that day – how different had been this day in comparison! The

smiling faces of Peterkin and Yvette were behind them, witnessing their union, and

how much more welcome a sight than the exalted company who had watched her

previous nuptials. Her only deep regret, in a special place in her heart, was that

Nicholas was not here with them.



With a start, she realised that the service was over, and with Ivan‟s hand in

hers, they left the church, to return to the small but comfortable inn that was to be

Tanya‟s home whilst Ivan was on his way to the Tsar. Her husband had taken over a

whole floor, despite her protests, and it was there that the wedding breakfast was

held.



It was whilst she was sitting, a glow of happiness pervading her whole being,

Countess Dostoyevskiy, wife of her beloved, that she first felt the tiny fluttering stir of

the fruit of their love. Her pregnancy was now in its fifth month, and her stomach was

rounding out – she had been afraid that Ivan would notice, but it was as yet barely

perceptible, and he had mentioned nothing. As the slight, feathery movement stirred

within her, Tanya felt that her cup was flowing over, then the thought of Ivan‟s

impending departure swept over her like a cold shadow, and she had the sudden,

frightening thought that she might never see him again. The very idea made her feel

faint and ill.



Ivan‟s voice brought her back to the present.



Tanya

341



„What is it, Tanya? You look so pale. Are you tired after such a gruelling

journey, and so much excitement?‟



She shook her head, forcing a laugh.



„No, no,‟ she disclaimed. „I was just wishing I was going with you tomorrow.

Go quickly, my love, and come back to me, for I truly think I cannot live without you

by my side.‟



He raised her hand to his lips, gazing tenderly down at her. „I shall be back in

no time at all, and we shal go together to our new home, and then perhaps I can

make up to you for all that life has dealt you.‟



The day was drawing to a close when, by unspoken consent, the young

couple withdrew to their own apartments, and there in the warm cosy glow of the

firelight, at last, Tanya told her husband the story of her life, from its tragic beginning

with the death of her family to the start of their life together.



Ivan sat quietly, his eyes fixed on that beautiful, expressive face, listening in

wonder to the tale she unfolded. He heard the sorrow in her voice as she spoke of

the friends she had loved and lost, of Nicholas and poor little Veda, of Erik and the

merchant, Olaf, who had given her back the will to live and made her a wealthy

woman in her own right, all of them dead and lost in the mists of time. For the first

time, she left nothing out, but opened her heart to this man whom she loved above

all others. The candles were guttering in their sockets and her voice was hoarse

when at last it trailed into silence. The silence remained for so many minutes that she

raised her eyes to his face, half afraid at what she might see, but the eyes that held

hers were tender and full of wonder as he rose to his feet and gathered her up into

his arms.



„It is good to know that one so beautiful has also the true beauty – of the soul,‟

he murmured, and she seemed to hear another voice speaking those words –



Tanya

342

Sten‟ka‟s voice as she had heard him on the threshold of her other marriage. Then

he had said that she would one day find true happiness. Wel, now she had, and she

was about to start a new life.



Their lovemaking that night was gentle, and neither slept much, for each hour

that slipped away was precious, and it wasn‟t until the grey light of dawn crept

through the window that they finally sank into a deep slumber from which they were

awakened all too soon by Peterkin, who informed them that the escort were saddling

up and were impatient to be away on the first stage of their long journey.



The cold light of early morning cast a depressing shadow over Tanya‟s heart,

and, as if in a dream, the young couple ate breakfast and dressed, then all too soon

were facing one another with that strange awkwardness that befalls before a parting.

Wordlessly Ivan held her tightly, kissing her ruthlessly, and then turned to the door.



„Stay here, my love, in this room where we have been so happy. I want to

remember you in this setting. Take great care and know that although I am leaving

you, my thoughts and love stay always with you. Farewell.‟



For a moment, he looked searchingly at her, as though imprinting on his mind

every contour of her face; then the door banged, and he was gone.



With an ache in her throat from holding back the tears that were now

brimming over, Tanya stumbled to the window and watched Ivan mount his

horse without a backward glance . The restless horses were given their

heads, the Cossack guard close behind him, cutting off her view and the

cavalcade swept around the bend and headed for the Russian frontier.



With Ivan‟s departure, the outstanding good health that Tanya had

been enjoying deserted her also. During the month that followed, her figure

swelled as the child within her grew, until Peterkin and Yvette could hardly be

unaware of her condition. She became listless, sickly, and unable to stomach



Tanya

343

her food. When she told Yvette that Ivan had left in ignorance of the

existence of the coming child, the girl‟s eyes widened, and she obviously

thought that Tanya was mad not to have told her husband before he left,

although she never mentioned the subject. That Yvette and Peterkin were in

love was also obvious at this time, and the sight of their happiness was a

torture to Tanya, although she knew it was selfish and wrong to be jealous of

them; she knew, of course, that under different circumstances, she would

have been delighted for them.



However, when they came to her and asked for her blessing on their

marriage, she was thoroughly ashamed and, pulling herself together, wished

them all the happiness that she herself had known.



The following week, she forced herself to rise from her bed for the

wedding, for although she felt unable to face going back to the chapel where

she had been married such a short time ago, she knew how deeply hurt the

loyal youngsters would be if she failed to attend, so for the first time for

weeks, she left her apartments, swathing her swollen figure in a large, warm

cloak against the cold white world outside. It was snowing heavily, although a

rising wind promised to clear the skies, and Tanya shivered all the way to the

church.



The simple, poignant ceremony was soon over, and glowing with

happiness, the young couple left the chapel. Tanya lingered for a moment,

remembering her own wedding, and was just turning to leave when a

shadow detached itself from the wall and glided towards her. She gave a

start, but the figure spoke quickly.



„Your pardon, Countess, but I have word from your husband. I cannot

explain here, the message is both urgent and secret. I do not wish it known



Tanya

344

that I am here. Can you slip out later tonight and meet me here? I will then

give you the message and tell you what your husband wishes to do.‟



Her brain in a whirl, Tanya stared at the shadowy figure before her.

She could not see the man‟s face at all, but his voice sounded vaguely

familiar, and she supposed him to be one of the Count‟s escort.



„But I do not understand,‟ she cried. „Why must I meet you in secret?

What . . . ?‟



The figure interrupted her.



„Hush. The Count is now out of favour, and the message and

instructions are long. I cannot stay. If you love your husband, be here at

midnight – alone. Tell no one.‟



On this rather melodramatic note, the figure turned and slipped back

into the shadows.



Tanya stood numbly, her heart beating fast, questions chasing each

other through her mind, but it had all happened so quickly, and the

messenger had already disappeared. So Ivan was out of favour with the

Tsar! That could only mean one thing, that Peter had refused to have her

back in Russia and most probably was angry with Ivan for marrying her. Her

heart went cold. What would Ivan do when faced with such a situation?

When he had been here with her, within easy reach of her arms, he would

not have thought twice of that, she was sure. But how different would his

feelings be far away in Moscow, surrounded by the Tsar‟s power, by all his

old comrades, and even old loves? Would the love he felt for her be strong

enough to overcome such obstacles? If only she could be sure. For the first

time, she found herself wishing she had told Ivan about their child. Surely, if

one thing would bind him to her, it would be that!



Tanya

345



She snapped herself out of her trance and shivered. Pulling her cloak more

closely around her, she hurried out of the freezing church and made her way back to

the inn. There was obviously only one way to find out the answers to all her

questions. She must slip out and keep the assignation with the messenger. For a

moment, she pondered on telling Peterkin and perhaps asking him to follow her at a

distance, but she dismissed the idea almost immediately. First and foremost, the

messenger must have had a reason for asking her to come alone, although she

would, of course, have trusted Peterkin with anything, but the main reason was that

she could hardly ask Peterkin and Yvette to forfeit their wedding night, and if she told

Peterkin, she knew nothing would keep him from coming. They had done so much

for her already, she would never ask them to give up their first, magic night of

marriage.



By now, she had arrived at the room where the wedding breakfast was set

out, and she was aware of the worried looks the young couple were casting at her

pale face and wild eyes. With a superhuman effort, Tanya forced herself to smile and

take her place at the table. She hardly touched her food, and the whole occasion

passed in a kind of dream, but as she had not been eating well anyway, and her

pregnancy had given her odd humours, of late, Peterkin and Yvette asked no

questions.



At last, after a nightmarish time of gay conversation and toasts to the happy

couple, Yvette and Peterkin departed for the room they were now to share, and she

was left alone to her thoughts.



The rest of the afternoon seemed to drag on interminably, but at last the

shadows lengthened. She made no attempt to undress, for although the hour was

still early, she knew she would never sleep – indeed, she would be afraid to in case

she slept too deeply and failed to wake. She sat in the chair by the fire and



Tanya

346

endeavoured to read a book, but when she became aware that she had read three

pages without taking in a word, she sighed and put it down.



The only sound in the room was the crackle of flames and the soft ticking of

the clock. Tanya had a tight feeling in the pit of her stomach and a cowardly desire to

take to her bed and stay there. She chided herself at her unreasoning dread – not

sure if it was because of what she feared to hear from her husband‟s messenger or

the sinister appearance of the man.



Almost without her knowledge, her eyelids grew heavy, and she fell into an

uneasy doze. As had happened before in times of crisis in her life, she began to

dream, and faces from the past appeared before her. They were all there, those she

had loved – and still loved. But suddenly, around the edges of her vision, a dark mist

began to form until it had obscured all – only Ivan remained, smiling and beckoning

to her. She tried to go to him, but something held her back, then the grey cloud

covered him too, and she grew aware of a chill of evil all around her, and she had the

eerie feeling that someone was standing behind her. Slowly she began to turn,

fearful of what she would see. She had almost turned the full circle when a log falling

in the hearth jerked her back to consciousness, and she gave a gasp, leaning back

in the chair, heart hammering. Her forehead was bathed in sweat, and she had, for a

moment a feeling of frustration, as if she wished to know who – or what – had been

threatening her from behind. Then her eyes fell on the clock, and she gave a start, all

other considerations cast aside. The hands pointed at a quarter to twelve! She must

have slept for a couple of hours, although it had only seemed like minutes. She rose

and crossed to the window and stared out, hardly knowing what she was looking for.

After the fury of the blizzard, all was quiet and still, and a full moon was sailing high in

the sky, casting a silver light over the snow beneath. How pure and untouched it



Tanya

347

looked! Why must man struggle and die, hate and kil, when nature itself was so

peaceful?



With an involuntary shiver, Tanya turned from the window and wrapped her

cloak around her. Silently, she let herself out of the room and glided down the

passageway. She faltered outside Peterkin‟s room, strongly tempted to knock and at

least tell him where she was going, but a low murmur from behind the door stayed

her hand, and suddenly feeling very alone, she turned away.



She was soon outside in the biting cold, the snow crunching under her boots

as she made her way towards the chapel. She would probably be a little early, but

thought she would prefer to be there first, to calm herself down a little. At last, the

dark walls of the church came into view, throwing a long, inky black shadow towards

her. Her heart beating faster, Tanya drew near, then stepped through the doorway. It

was pitch dark inside, the strips of moonlight from the narrow windows laying like

ribbons of silver across the floor.



„Is . . . is anyone there? Hullo.‟



Her voice sounded unnaturally loud in the silence, and even as she spoke,

she had a strong feeling that she should never have come here alone like this, that

the whole business was quite unlike Ivan. Men like him do not employ methods such

as these. If she had not been so overwrought, more herself, she would never have

been taken in. A prickle of pure terror ran up her back, and with a moan, she turned

to flee, but it was too late. Something struck her a stunning blow on the back of her

head, and without a sound, she crumpled to the floor. Almost immediately, it

seemed, she was back in her room, dozing in her chair. The dream was the same,

and with the same crawling fear, she was turning around to face the unknown horror

behind her. Only now, no welcome log falling awakened her, and she turned full

circle to find herself staring into the dreadful deformed face of Father Stevanov! With



Tanya

348

a scream of terror she tried to move, but could not, and the terrible face came nearer

and nearer, until it was looming over her, blotting out everything. She screamed

again, and a hand came down brutally over her mouth. She struggled helplessly and

became aware that the hand biting into her flesh was real, that the fearsome

countenance glaring down at her was also real. Then she lost consciousness again.



How much later it was that she came to her senses Tanya had no idea, but

she realised that she was in some sort of vehicle, travelling at high speed. She felt

herself to be in the throes of some terrible nightmare, then it all came flooding back.

With a sob, she struggled upright, cowering away in the corner from the dark figure

seated opposite to her.



„Welcome back to the world, my dear Princess – or I believe I should say

Countess now, should I not?‟



The hated voice was smooth and gloating, and Tanya wondered how she

could possibly have failed to recognise it before, in the chapel. What a fool she had

been! If only she had told someone of her assignation – if only she had been less

overwrought, able to think more clearly. Once before she had been stupidly gullible,

and was spirited away, but at least, in the end, that had been a good thing, or she

might still be a servant and never have led the life she had, but had she learnt

nothing? Her second sense had tried to warn her; if the log had not awakened her,

would she have seen Father Stevanov? Would she have realised the terrible trap

that awaited her? But it was no use repining. She was here, in his power. Why had

he gone to such lengths to kidnap her – to what fate was she being taken?



Her head was throbbing with pain, where she had been struck, and her

mouth was dry, but that inner something that had sustained her through so many

trials throughout her life came to the fore again. She raised her chin, and in a cool,



Tanya

349

impersonal voice said, „Why, Father Stevanov. And I quite thought I should never

have the pleasure of beholding your – er, charming face again.‟



With a hiss of fury, he leaned forward and struck her a ringing blow across

her face. Her head jerked back, and she cried out.



„I‟ll soon break your pride, you little bitch,‟ he snarled venomously. „You speak

like that to me again, and I‟ll break your neck.‟



Tanya shrank back, overcome by the hate in his voice.



„Where are you taking me?‟ she demanded. „What do you want of me?

When my husband finds out what you have done, you are as good as dead.‟



To her dismay, he laughed, and the evil sound sent shivers up and down her

spine.



„Your husband, my pretty, will never know what became of you. Even now he

is galloping off to do battle for his master, the Tsar. He does not care what becomes

of you – and he cares even less for the bastard you carry within you.‟



Tanya‟s heart went cold. „What are you saying, you devil,‟ she cried. „The

child is my husband‟s and will be his heir.‟



He laughed again. „He did not think so when he was informed his wife was

well gone in pregnancy – a pregnancy he knew nothing about. He had been

deceived, he cried. He called you a slut, a whore, and denounced you utterly. For, he

reasoned, if the child was his, why did you not tell him of the happy event yourself,

before you were married?‟



„You lie,‟ screamed Tanya, but she fell back against the cushions, her whole

being reeling under the worst blow she had ever had. It all sounded so true – how

otherwise did this evil man know that she had never told Ivan of the child? She had

thought that Ivan trusted her as she did him, but she could not help but think back on

some of the cruel things he had said to her, or the bad things he had once believed



Tanya

350

about her. She could hear his voice now, naming her whore in the gardens at

Versailles! Bitterly now she blamed herself for not teling him of the child; she had

only been thinking of him in keeping silent. If only she could go to him, force him to

listen to her, to make him understand that she loved only him, that he was her whole

life. But now he would never know! She was in the clutches of this evil creature, and

surely only death would release her from him. A tiny voice inside her whispered that

now she had nothing to live for – if she just reached out a hand and undid the door,

she could fling herself out of the fast-moving coach-sleigh, and so end the struggle

for ever. But even as she thought, the child inside her moved, and she laid a

protective hand on her belly. No, she could not, no matter what, condemn Ivan‟s

child to death before it had even seen the light of day. For whatever he thought, the

child was his, the fruit of their love, a tiny piece of each of them woven together into

one. Her baby must live, must be protected whatever the consequences to herself.

She forced her voice to become humble and supplicating.



„Please tell me what you want of me,‟ she begged. „I am a rich woman – I will

give you whatever you ask. Back at the inn, I have a fortune in jewels, they are yours

if you will but set me free. I swear I will never tell anyone.‟



„That‟s much better, Countess, I like to hear you plead. I should like to hear

you plead some more, but must tell you that you are wasting your time. Here, look.‟

At these words, Father Stevanov stretched out his hand and opened the lid of the

large casket on the seat beside him. With a shock, Tanya realised it was hers, and

she did not need to see him running his fingers through her jewels to know that her

last chance of escape had gone.



With a sickening feeling of helplessness she sank back.



„How did you get them?‟ she asked in a hoarse voice.



Tanya

351



„Well, my dear, the spy that I set on you many months ago had her uses you

know. It was realy quite simple for her to take them from your room after you had left

and slip them outside to me.‟



„Her?‟ croaked Tanya. „Spy? Of whom do you speak?‟



„Why, Yvette of course,‟ the hateful voice replied. „Quite amusing to think of

her marrying Peterkin, eh? But it did keep him out of my hair, you know.‟



„Liar,‟ cried Tanya, her universe reeling for the second time. Pretty, kind

Yvette, always so loyal and dependable. Never! She would never believe it. Yet

again, a small voice whispered, „How then did he get his hands on your jewels? Who

else knew where you had them hidden?‟



Oh God, but her spirit was being crushed, blow after blow had reduced her to

unabated misery. She found herself scarcely caring what fate had in store for her,

and fell into a state of lethargy, until she was roused by his voice cutting across her

thoughts.



„To return to your original questions, Where am I taking you and why.‟ His

voice sank to a venomous whisper and spittle flecked his lips. „You little bitch, you,

from the moment you first crossed my path, have ruined my every scheme, thwarted

every bid I made for power. How I have hated you! I have fed on that hatred over the

past years since you finally robbed me of my goal and denounced the convent

where I was gaining power, working towards ends you have no inkling of. First, there

was the plot with the Tsarina. That would have made me the foremost priest in the

land, giving me untold power. But too much depended on your fool of a husband.

Oh, he was no fool before he met you, he had a clear head and quick brain. But you!

You besotted him, ruined everything, until one night, in a drunken stupor, he

mentioned the plot in front of one of Romodanovsky‟s spies.‟



Tanya

352



Tanya drew a sharp breath. So it was Erik himself who had betrayed the

secret, causing his own downfal. How unhappy he must have been, to have taken to

drinking to such an extent! She felt a swift rush of shame and regret when she

remembered him as he had been when she first saw him, proud and arrogant, then

as he had been before his death, twisted and broken, calling her name. There,

surely, was yet another man who would have been so much better off had he never

met her. Yet she had not asked him to carry her off, she could surely not blame

herself entirely.



Father Stevanov‟s voice brought her back to the present with a jolt.



„Not content with that,‟ continued the priest, „not content with ruining that

scheme, you then, by a stroke of providence, fel into my clutches again at the

convent in Moscow. Ah, but I had a fine end prepared for you. You would have

begged me to kill you before we had finished. My nuns were skilled at their work. You

saw the results of such handiwork in your maidservant, did you not?‟



Tanya suddenly felt sick as she remembered poor Veda. „You devil,‟ she

hissed between her teeth.



He laughed unpleasantly. „Oh, I hardly aspire to such heights, although I do

not deny that he is my master. But, alas, I have no such skills myself, and all my

nuns – my sister included – were arrested and banished from Russia. That is

something else you will pay for. I have my own methods of torture that are much

more subtle. When I have finished with you, I shall make you watch me sacrifice your

son to my master, and afterwards you may, if you beg me hard enough, join him.‟



These fearful words ground into Tanya‟s skull, and she felt a scream rising

inside her. Fighting it down, she thought that if her son was to die anyway, they

should both die cleanly, here and now, in the open air. She flung herself forward and

heaved at the latch on the door. It gave, the door swung open, and a blast of icy air



Tanya

353

hit her in the face. But even as she made to jump, the coach gave a violent lurch,

and she was flung away from the door on to the floor. Father Stevanov leaned

forward and slammed the door shut again, shooting the bolt, then he turned towards

her.



„You cannot escape me that easily, you know. I think it will be better if you go

back to sleep for a while – yes, decidedly so.‟



With these words, his fist came down in a blur of white and struck her, and

without a sound, she sank down into deep and utter darkness.



Tanya

354





Chapter 14


Peterkin came slowly back to consciousness and stretched happily, his

gaze turning to the face beside him on the pillow. Truly, life was good. It had

most certainly changed for the better the day Tanya had come into his life.

He had thought she was an angel, and his opinion had really changed very

little since.

She had rescued him from that fearful place that even now sometimes

gave him nightmares and had indirectly been the cause of his good luck in

being taken in by Count Dostoyevskiy. Now here he was today, with a good

education, a place in life, and a new and beautiful wife.

His face clouded a little as he thought of how unhappy Tanya had

looked lately, her usual glowing good health quite deserting her. He knew

that women expecting babies had odd humours and was hoping that the

mood would soon pass. Truth to tell, after the active, interesting life he had

led with the Count, Peterkin was beginning to chafe at kicking his heels in

this miserable town, with nothing to do but be a glorified nursemaid.

His face softened as he looked down at his young wife. Perhaps soon

she would be in the same condition as Tanya, and he a father! He would

make quite sure that he did not leave her alone when she was expecting his

son! That, of course, was the cause of Tanya‟s unhappiness. With the

departure of the Count, all her vitality and zest for life seemed to have

deserted her too.

If only he would return. If he travelled fast, was not delayed in any way,

he might even be back in time for the birth of his child. Peterkin heartily

disapproved of Tanya‟s refusal to tell her husband of the child – could not



Tanya

355

understand it, although no doubt she had her reasons. It suddenly dawned

on him that it would be highly unlikely that the Count would have left at all

had he known, and that would have meant complete estrangement from his

country and the Tsar.

Peterkin had always respected Tanya, but now she seemed to be so

selfless that he felt humbled.

He slipped quietly out of the bed so as not to disturb Yvette and

washed hurriedly in the pitcher of cold water, shivering. It was still very early,

but somehow he felt unable to sleep. He dressed quickly and, slipping out of

the door, made his way downstairs. He peered out of the window where a

pale sun was struggling to penetrate the early mist. The snow was packed

solid after the freezing temperatures overnight. After the heavy fall the

previous day, the skies seemed to have cleared, and the virgin snow lay

unspoilt and pristine.

His idle gaze fell on to the snow by the door, and he saw that someone

had been out early, for there was a single set of footprints leading away in

the direction of the village. He shivered and, turning away from the window,

went back upstairs to his bedroom. Yvette was just awakening, and she

smiled sleepily at him.

„You are abroad early, my husband. Brrr, ‟tis cold, the fire needs to be

lit. If we wait for those lazy servants, we‟ll freeze.‟

Peterkin laughed. „I suppose that is a hint for me to do some work.‟

He soon had a good fire going and stood warming himself before it.

Yvette slipped out of bed and slid her arms about his waist, snuggling up to

him.



Tanya

356

„Mmm, I‟m so happy. I feel guilty really, being so happy when the

mistress is missing her own husband so much. Do you know, I‟m sure if she

had told him she was expecting his child, he would never have left her. I

don‟t understand her at all.‟

Peterkin smiled fondly down on the top of her dark head, reflecting how

different the two women were. There was nothing self-sacrificing about his

Yvette; she would fight tooth and nail for what was hers.

„Do you know, love, I think Tanya must at this moment be feeling very

lonely and lost – the wedding yesterday must have brought back such

memories, it could not help but be painful to her. I think it would be a nice

thought if you were to prepare some hot, sweet chocolate, as she likes it,

and take it in to her.‟

Yvette pouted up at him. „Sometimes I think you love her better than

you do me,‟ she said coquettishly but smiled to soften the words. „You are

quite right, of course, my Peterkin. I‟ll get dressed now and go and make

some.‟

She kissed him lingeringly, then laughed as his arms tightened around

her.

„No, no, I must go and make the chocolate. However, when I have

taken it in, I‟ll be back and . . .‟ she giggled and kissed him again, then

twisting out of his hold, fled to get dressed.

Some fifteen minutes later, she was back, her face white and

frightened.

„Peterkin, Peterkin, where are you?‟

He emerged from the adjoining room, where he had been sorting

through some papers.



Tanya

357

„Whatever‟s the matter? You look as though you have seen a ghost!‟

His voice sharpened suddenly. „Tanya?‟ he cried. „Is she ill?‟

Yvette would not have been human had she not felt a pang at the stark

fear in his voice, but she pushed the thought away.

„She‟s not in her room,‟ she whispered. „Her bed hasn‟t even been slept

in.‟

Peterkin stood stock-still, his brain refusing to function. Where could

she have got to? For a moment, he had the dreadful thought that perhaps

she had been so unhappy that she had done something foolish, but he

rejected the idea almost as soon as it was formed. Tanya was not of the ilk to

take such a cowardly way out as that, to do anything that drastic. Then

where could she have gone?

Without another word, he strode to Tanya‟s room, Yvette hurrying

behind. He cast a cursory glance around and crossed to the closet. All

Tanya‟s gowns were still there and the huge leather trunk she packed them

all in. He looked down at his wife. „Is anything missing? Anything at all?‟

She checked through the garments and shook her head. Then a

sudden thought came to her.

„The jewels!‟ she cried and, throwing back the lid of the trunk, pressed

a carving on the side. There was a click, and the bottom hinged up, revealing

a large, empty cavity. Yvette gave a shriek.

„We‟ve been robbed. They‟ve gone. The mistress couldn‟t have taken

them herself, they‟d be too heavy for her to carry, especially in her condition.

Why, when I struggled downstairs with them . . .‟ She broke off, and a half-

puzzled, half-frightened look crossed her face. She sat back slowly on her

heels, a frown on her face.



Tanya

358

„What am I saying?‟ she whispered. „I have never . . . and yet as I

spoke, I remembered doing just that!‟

She glanced fearfully round and crossed herself. „There‟s devil‟s work

afoot here,‟ she said hoarsely. „I‟ve been bewitched, and the mistress has

vanished.‟

Her words hung in the air, and Peterkin felt the old, superstitious fear

crawling over him for a moment, then he gave himself a shake.

„Nonsense,‟ he said shortly. „There must be a rational explanation.‟

He thought for a moment, then snapped his fingers. „Of course, the

footprints in the snow,‟ he cried. „She must have been restless and got up

early, taken a walk. No, wait, the bed has not been slept in. So, I shall follow

the footprints, see where she has gone. Yvette, you must think very, very

carefully, try to remember what you did, what happened. I shall not be long.‟

On those words, he ran back and got his cloak, then hurried

downstairs. For a moment, he thought it would be no use, for the inn was

stirring, and footprints churned up the snow in the yard as maidservants drew

water and stable boys ran around tending the horses. But when he crossed

the courtyard, he was relieved to see that no one, as yet, had left the inn,

and he was able to follow the little footprints quite easily. They led straight

through the village and made unerringly for the church standing on its own,

set aside from the houses by the graves surrounding it. He arrived at the

door and flung it open, expecting to see a figure perhaps kneeling in prayer,

or even in a faint from the cold, but with a chill in his heart , he saw the place

was quite empty.

He called out, his voice echoing round, mocking back at him. He felt

another unreasoning fear, because although the footprints led up to the door,



Tanya

359

there was no second set leaving. Then he remembered the small side door

at the other end of the church and ran over to it, pushing it open. The snow

outside was churned, and several sets of footprints ran here and there.

There was also a set of sled marks and hoof prints; there was no doubt that

a vehicle had stood here and had made off to the north – towards Russia!

For a wild moment he thought the Count must have returned, then cursed

himself for a fool. This was not the way that Ivan would return for his wife. He

gave a sudden exclamation as he noticed that something – or someone had

been dragged across the ground, and there, half buried in the snow lay a

black crucifix on a slender chain. How often had he seen it around Tanya‟s

slender white throat! She had been wearing it the first time he had ever seen

her; he believed it to have bee n given to her by her mother. Now it lay, the

chain snapped, only the unusual colour making it discernible. He bent and

picked it up, staring down at it with a lump in his throat. There was no doubt

that its owner had been forcibly taken from the church and abducted in the

waiting vehicle. His mind seemed to have gone blank, and he stared

unseeingly into the distance, drawing the chain uselessly through his fingers.

Who could be responsible? He tried to think who would have any reason for

taking such drastic measures, and for a moment, he thought of the King, but

quickly dismissed the idea, for the simple reason that the tracks headed

towards Russian soil. Tanya must have known whoever it was, because she

had gone of her own free will to the church. What could have been her

reason, and why had she not confided in him?

Peterkin gave himself a shake. It was no use standing here indulging in

useless speculation. He must hurry back and get Yvette, pack up, and follow

the trail. Even as he turned, he could see the snow clouds massing again on



Tanya

360

the horizon. It would soon be impossible to follow the tracks, and he did not

even know who he would be following. With a set look on his young face,

Peterkin turned on his heel and ran back the way he had come. He thought

of the Count and the trust he had placed in him to look after his wife, and his

heart went cold. Whatever happened, however long it took, he must find

Tanya and restore her safely to her husband. The thought that he might

already be too late could not help but intrude, but he pushed it resolutely

away.

Yvette was awaiting him in their rooms, pacing up and down anxiously.

Her face crumpled as he stuttered out his story, and she sank down,

sobbing.

„Oh Peterkin, Peterkin, what shall we do? I‟ve been thinking and

thinking about the jewel box, and I‟m almost sure I can remember carrying it

out of Tanya‟s room and down the back stairs, but I cannot remember any

more, try as I will. It‟s as though my mind has a wall across it. The only other

thing I can remember is too horrible – like something out of a nightmare –

and I‟m almost sure that it was, anyway.‟

Peterkin paused his frantic pacing and looked at her frowningly.

„Go on,‟ he said sharply. „Anything may help. Tell me exactly what you

can remember.‟

„Well, it‟s nothing really. Just a face in a dream. The horrid thing is, it

was such an evil face, distorted and ugly.‟ She shuddered. „That‟s all I

remember – that and his awful eyes, getting bigger and bigger, until they

seemed to swallow me up.‟ She began to sob again.



Tanya

361

Peterkin stared down at her, light dawning slowly in his eyes. „Oh

God,‟ he whispered. „It couldn‟t be . . . and yet. If I thought . . . my God, she‟s

as good as dead – if not worse!‟

Yvette stopped crying abruptly, staring up at him fearfully. „What do

you mean?‟

„I want you to think very, very carefully,‟ Peterkin said tensely. „This

face, was it deformed about the eyes – one eye without a pupil, the other,

cold and staring?‟

Yvette shuddered, and nodded, looking at him in surprise. „Why yes,

yes. How did you know?‟

Peterkin slapped his fist into his palm. „So, that devil still lives! I might

have known. How he got hold of you, or when, I don‟t know, but it‟s obvious

he took over your mind in some devilish way. Quickly, down the stairs to the

back door of the inn, where you think you went down. I want to check on

something.‟

They hurried downstairs, and Peterkin drew back the bolts on the door.

A startled kitchen maid stared in bewilderment as he gave a cry, pointing to

the telltale footprints that marred the snow there, then led away in the

direction of the village.

„He must have got you to bring him the jewels here, when he found out

about them from you when he took over your mind. I always knew that that

fiend was in league with the devil! What a lot of trouble he went to, to get her

in his power. He can‟t mean to kill her yet, he must have some awful plan, I

don‟t know what exactly, but if he has her in his clutches, there is no time to

be lost. Just pack a bag of overnight things – a change of clothes, whatever

you think we‟ll need, and get all the money the Count left for Tanya. I‟ve



Tanya

362

been keeping most of that, it‟s at the bottom of my trunk. Thank goodness

you didn‟t know about that, or that might have disappeared too. I‟m going

down to the village to hire or buy a vehicle – whatever I can get. I‟ll explain it

all when we get under way.‟

He disappeared out of the door, leaving Yvette staring after him in

bewilderment. He managed to get a good, fast coach-sleigh and horses,

rather small, but that was all to the better as they would be able to move

more swiftly. Yvette, meanwhile, had packed everything she could into the

big, leather trunks, determined to leave as little as possible. There was a

spirited argument about this, as Peterkin did not want the heavy boxes to

slow them down, and Yvette was most reluctant to leave all the beautiful

gowns behind, but they reached a compromise and soon had the sleigh

loaded up and ready to go. Peterkin paid their bill and parted with some of

his precious money to make sure a message was sent to the Count‟s

Moscow residence, with the promise of more largesse when the message

was delivered. Pleased with the speed with which they had made ready, they

were soon driving out of the village at a spanking pace, Peterkin driving with

Yvette beside him, snuggled up inside a big fur rug. They rounded the bend

and picked up the trail as it led northwards, over the frozen landscape and on

towards Russia. It was going to be a long, hard chase, but Peterkin was

determined that nothing would stop him from finding Tanya and saving her

from the terrible fate that undoubtedly awaited her at the hands of the evil

Father Stevanov.



* * * *

Tanya groaned and tried to struggle upright, but curiously she seemed

to have no strength. Her head felt as if it were on fire, and she was lying on



Tanya

363

something hard and uncomfortable. She moaned again and sank back into

oblivion.

When next she awoke she felt slightly better, although still very sick

and dizzy. She managed to raise herself up and realised she was on the

floor of a moving vehicle. A violent pain shot through her head; then her

memory came flooding back. Cold fingers clutched at her heart, and she

retched weakly.

The dark figure sitting in the corner leaned forward.

„Dear me, we seem to be a trifle indisposed.‟

Tanya turned her head away, tears trickling from the corners of her

eyes. Never in her life, not even at its worst moments had she felt so

helpless, frightened, and alone. If only she had been at her full strength, she

might have felt capable of fighting back, of escaping somehow, but in her

present condition, she had no hope at all. All her fighting spirit, she intuitively

knew, must go towards keeping herself and her baby alive. She was no fool,

and knew that her position was desperate, but from what the priest had been

saying to her, it seemed he was not going to kill her yet. If only she could

keep herself and her baby alive until it was born, surely, surely, she would be

rewarded by fate. If not, at least, she would have tried!

She pulled herself painfully up into the seat and leaned back, panting.

She put her hands protectively over her belly and was relieved to feel the

usual responsive kick. At least, no harm had come to her child. She

speculated on her best approach towards the evil man opposite her.

She spoke, at last, in a low, trembling voice.

„For pity‟s sake, have you any water? If you wish me to bear this child,

you must give me food and drink.‟



Tanya

364

„Must?‟ queried the hateful voice. „I must do nothing. However, what

you say is true. We shall not be stopping to eat or sleep, as I am eager to

return to what I must at present refer to as home. However, my servant will

replenish the food store when and where he can. Here is bread.‟

He opened a wicker hamper at his feet and pulled out a crust of black

bread, which he flung towards her. „Here is a water bag. Make it last, it‟s all

you‟ll get for a while.‟

The bread was stale and hard, but Tanya ate every crumb before he

changed his mind. She washed it down with a draught of water, then was

forced to sit and watch Father Stevanov gorge himself on chicken legs,

sweet white bread, and large quaffs of what looked like cherry vodka. He

then leaned back with a satisfied sigh and idly ate from a bowl of

sweetmeats.

Tanya‟s heart sank as she realised that this was the treatment she

could expect from now on. How far he was taking her, of course, she had no

idea; indeed, she did not even know in what direction they were heading. As

far as she could see, she had no hope of help, for Peterkin would have not

the faintest idea what had happened to her. In fact, when he saw her jewels

were gone, he might even think she had run away. And if Yvette was indeed

a spy of Stevanov‟s – although even now every thought rebelled against the

idea – then she would almost certainly prevent him, one way or another, from

any pursuit.

Her thoughts automatically turned to Ivan, and pain washed through

her. She had deliberately tried to keep from thinking of him after the awful

shock of Stevanov‟s disclosures of the previous night. Somehow the thought

of Ivan riding off to the war frightened her almost as much as the fact that he



Tanya

365

no longer loved her. How shallow must his love be to falter at the first hurdle

– and yet, when she thought detachedly about it, something somewhere did

not ring true. From whom had Ivan received the news that she was

pregnant? From whom had he unhesitatingly accepted the fact that the child

was not his? Indeed, he would be more than likely to throttle whoever had

been misguided enough to try to tell him such a thing. Suddenly, she felt

ashamed at herself for believing this evil man. True, she had not been

herself, but she should have known better. She remembered the look of love

that had shone from Ivan‟s eyes before their parting, and a warm glow began

to pervade her body. She closed her eyes, feeling faint with relief. Stevanov

had lied – he must have lied! He would go to any lengths to break her, and

he had tried to undermine her faith and love for those dearest to her. Of

course, he had lied about Yvette too; there was no way she could have been

a spy for him! How he had found out all her closest secrets she couldn‟t

imagine, but being the man he was, he would no doubt have his methods.

She could only hope that Yvette or Peterkin had not been harmed . Surely, by

now, Peterkin could not have failed to, at least, send word to Ivan, and surely

then help would arrive. He would move heaven and earth to find her and

then this nightmare would be over, and she would be safe in his arms again.

This was the thought that was to sustain Tanya during the weeks to

come – weeks that merged into months as the nightmare journey continued.

Tanya was given the minimum needed to keep her alive, but she became

dreadfully thin and wasted. She was submitted to many indigniti es, although

Father Stevanov never touched her, other than the odd blow, or push. In all

the weeks of travel, she was only allowed outside the coach when she

needed to relieve herself and was then given no privacy. The initial



Tanya

366

humiliation soon faded, as all else faded but the desperate fight for survival,

and sometimes for sanity!

Whenever necessity dictated that the horses be changed, Tanya had

to submit to being roughly gagged and bound, and as the priest hated the

sunlight, the heavy curtains that covered the windows were never pulled

back, and she did not even get a glimpse of any of the posting houses. She

was given no facilities for washing, and her clothes were filthy and her skin,

crawling. If she had been given the opportunity to see herself, she wo uld

have been horrified at her appearance, but no such offer being made she

was at least in ignorance of the fact and, indeed, could hardly raise herself

from her habitual apathy to consider her appearance.

At last, one cold, snowy night, the journey came to an end. The huge,

brutish-looking man who was Father Stevanov‟s driver and general servant

had to carry Tanya from the coach, as she was too weak to walk. Although

she was unsure how much time had passed since her abduction, she was

sure in herself that the birth of her child was not far off, although so thin had

she become that she looked smaller than she had in her sixth month.

If Tanya had been hoping for better conditions, she soon discovered

her mistake. The priest‟s house was not much more than a large crumbling

tower, obviously the only part left of some larger structure. The ground floors

had been made tolerably comfortable, Tanya noted, but they were obviously

not intended for her. Her tormentor had her carried up to the highest room,

which consisted of round, cold stone walls running with damp, a stone floor

strewn with rotting straw, and a low pallet pushed against one wall, covered

by a thin, dirty blanket. Upon this unsavoury bed, Boris, the loutish



Tanya

367

manservant, unceremoniously dumped the unfortunate girl. Too weak to

move, she lay staring up at the hateful face above her.

„So, Tanya, not perhaps what you are used to, but home for you. Your

last home, and the only one your child will ever know. The weeks grow less –

soon I shall have my revenge – soon now.‟

On these words, he left, the heavy door swinging shut, and three bolts

shot home on the other side. Despair in her heart, Tanya lay where she had

been dropped as his words seemed to echo around the cold, stone walls.

Perhaps this was her punishment for all the deaths she had caused –

inadvertently or otherwise. How slender the hope that help would arrive –

indeed, it seemed, at that dark moment, impossible that anyone could ever

find this isolated place. That she was in Russia she was almost certain, from

the occasional glimpses of the countryside she had had, and equally certain

that she was somewhere in the far north, for surely spring could not now be

far away, but there was no sign of it here, the days were short and very cold.

Time was running out, and assuming that they were indeed searching for

her, the chances of Ivan or anyone else finding this place in the time she had

left were remote. This meant that somehow she must use what resources

she could and try to escape by herself. A sob escaped her at the thought, for

she was too weak even to move, her baby was due very shortly, and she

was locked fast in a prison from which there could be no escape. What hope

had she? Time was short, far too short.

Nevertheless, the next few days seemed more like years to Tanya.

She saw very little of Stevanov, although he came to check on her

occasionally, and to gloat, but she would shut her eyes and mind to him, and

he seemed to tire of this and left her in peace. At first, she had been relieved



Tanya

368

to see that Boris had a wife and that the woman was to wait on her needs –

which she did by slapping down her meagre rations and emptying her slop

pail. Any hope of an ally, however, swiftly abated. Old Olga was, if possible,

surlier than her unprepossessing spouse and spoke in a coarse dialect that

was almost incomprehensible to Tanya. The one relief that remained was

that however little she might relish her company, she was at least a woman

and therefore would be indispensable when her time came.

Her baby had become still over the last day or so, and Tanya was

beginning to fear that something had gone wrong when one night, she was

awakened by a cramping pain low in her stomach. She lay awake, staring

around the moonlit room until a second pain told her that at last her baby

was ready to be born. Into what sort of world it was arriving remained to be

seen. Soon the pains were growing steadily worse, and Tanya began to call

for help, weakly at first, then soon she was screaming out her need.

With a flood of relief, she saw the stocky figure of Olga bending over

her, then everything faded with the next wash of pain.

With the old woman‟s capable help, the birth was surprisingly quick,

and soon the grimy walls were reverberating with the urgent, hungry cries of

a new life. Not even her dreadful predicament stopped the flood of joy she

felt as she took her son in her arms. She had been certain all along that the

child would be a boy, and as she looked down at the crumpled, angry little

face, a fierce, protective love swept over her. How was she to look after her

child in her weak condition? She was helpless to even tend her child‟s

needs, let alone plan any kind of escape. Was it possible that this tiny life

was going to be snuffed out almost as soon as it had begun? This was Ivan‟s

son, a part of them both; somehow, somehow she must protect him. Tanya



Tanya

369

was sure of one thing, if she really did have to watch her son being

murdered, she would lose what little sanity remained to her, which would no

doubt be a merciful release!

Olga had started a fire in the tiny grate to boil water, and the room had

begun to warm up. Tanya had been lying in the icy cold for so long, she had

forgotten what it was like to be warm, although the fact that she had been

allowed to keep her fur-lined cloak had undoubtedly saved her life – with that

and the blanket, she had contrived to keep her body temperature away from

the danger level, although her hands and feet were permanently numb with

cold.

The fire burned up, and Olga boiled some more water and gave Tanya

a cursory wash down and sponged the wailing baby clean.

„Put it to the breast,‟ she advised suddenly, in a surprisingly clear

voice. „Milk won‟t be through, but it will be a comfort.‟

She then covered Tanya over again, and looked at the baby, saying

gruffly, „It‟s a fine boy.‟

Tanya looked at her in surprise, then took her hand and thanked her in

her low, sweet voice for her help in bringing her son into the world. The

woman looked half surly and half gratified and, pulling her hand away, went

out of the room, returning shortly with a bowl and mug. She looked a little

frightened at her daring and thrust them towards Tanya, with a swift look

over her shoulder.

„Eat,‟ she ordered. „No one will come in tonight, I think.‟

„Wait,‟ cried Tanya as she turned to go. „Please, can you tell me what

day this is? I must know my child‟s birthday.‟



Tanya

370

„It wants two days to May day,‟ replied the woman and, still looking

scared-stiff, scuttled out.

Tanya picked up the bowl and, to her astonishment, saw it contained a

large quantity of a thick, tasty-looking stew, no doubt the fare being enjoyed

downstairs. She scooped it out avidly with her fingers, for she had nothing

else. It was delicious, and Tanya ate ravenously. The mug contained hot milk

laced with vodka – goat‟s milk by the taste. She drained it to the last drop,

then wiped round the bowl with a piece of bread left from when she had been

too weak to eat it.

With a contented sigh, she lay back on the bed, feeling the strength

returning to her undernourished body. For the first time for months, she had

a full stomach and felt properly warm. How basic, really, are the human

needs – food, warmth, and shelter. She felt more like her old self, although

the feeling would soon pass, she had no doubt.

Her son began to cry again, and remembering the old woman‟s advice,

she opened her dirty dress, then looked with disgust at her filthy skin. The

remains of the water the woman had used was still nearby the bed, so she

dragged herself over to it and managed to sponge herself down a little. She

then placed the tiny head against her breast, where he nuzzled hungrily. For

the first time for days, she felt able to think a little. She had already decided

to call her son Nicholas, in remembrance of her dear friend who had given

his life for her. It was the least she could do, and if her son grew up with just

half the qualities of the big-hearted Swede, he would be a fine man, indeed.

At the thought, a sob escaped her, for what chance would her son have to

grow up?



Tanya

371

Tired out now, Tanya wrapped herself and the baby in her cloak, pulled

the blanket over her feet, and sank into a deep, dreamless sleep.

She was rudely awakened a few hours later at daybreak by the cloak

being snatched away from her. Father Stevanov stood glaring down at her.

„Who gave you these?‟ he shrieked, pointing to the empty bowls. „Who

dared? Did that old hag light the fire too?‟

Tanya sat up, collecting her thoughts swiftly. If she was going to keep

Olga as an ally, she must cover for her. She stared up at him sulle nly.

„You‟re jesting, I suppose,‟ she whispered weakly, making her voice

sound fainter than need be. „The bitch took great delight in eating her supper

in here, right under my nose – and me too weak to move.‟

He looked uncertain. „Hmm. But she had no right to light the fire.‟ It

sounded pettish, even to him.

„The babe would have died of cold otherwise,‟ Tanya shrugged, „and I

understand that is not what you wish, at present.‟

„Yes, yes, all right,‟ he muttered. „So the boy is born, eh? Ha, and his

father will never set eyes on him, never. He will suit my purpose admirably –

will be the culmination of months of planning. I need a child for the ceremony

I am going to perform in less than two weeks‟ time. The date must be right –

the hour, then my master will hear my voice and raise me up to the heights I

am meant for, but my master needs blood – virgin blood. That, your son will

provide. You will provide additional power. I shall take your body, then your

life. But first, you shall watch me slit your son‟s throat. With two blows, I shall

revenge myself on you and, at the same time, bring such power down on

myself as you, with your puny little mind, could not even imagine. Soon, soon

I shall be in my rightful place, power shall be mine.‟



Tanya

372

His voice ended in a fana tical screech, then he turned on his heel and

strode out.

Tanya lay trembling, holding the child against her. She felt hysteria

rising up in her and fought it down. Hysterics would do her no good. She

must think, think! Her one slender hope lay in Olga, who had shown her

some sympathy, but to her dismay, it was Boris who brought in her next

meal. Obviously, Stevanov was taking no chances. Hope ebbed and bitter

tears welled up, spilling down her cheeks unheeded. One ray of light was

that she was being given gruel now, as well as bread, and Boris had been

instructed to make up the fire every day. Stevanov was afraid of losing his

sacrifice, it seemed!

The baby was fretful and was obviously hungry, but still Tanya

appeared to have no milk. She told Boris on his next visit, and although he

took no notice, it was obvious that he had passed on the information,

because late that afternoon, Stevanov arrived with Olga in tow. At a

peremptory nod from the priest, she examined Tanya‟s breasts. Although

she flinched, Tanya suffered the humiliation in silence. Olga turned to

Stevanov.

„She will have no milk,‟ she said flatly. „The babe is weakening too.‟

Stevanov began to rant and drove the woman out before him. Tanya

lay, her mind in turmoil. Obviously her lack of nourishment over the last

weeks had taken its toll. Would they now provide milk for her baby?

About an hour later, they returned. Without ceremony, the woman took

the baby from Tanya, who screamed and tried to struggle up. She was

pushed back and was forced to lie and watch them leave, taking her son with

them.



Tanya

373

With a superhuman effort, she dragged herself off the bed and over to

the narrow window. Craning her neck, she could just make out a strip of

snow and, in the distance, some trees, but she could see little else.

Collapsing on to the floor, she sobbed bitterly, wishing only that she could

die.

She must have fallen asleep, for it was quite dark when she was

awakened by a knocking on the door. She dragged herself over to it.

„Who is it?‟ she cried. „Who‟s there?‟

„Olga,‟ came the reply. „I can‟t come in, because he‟s locked the door

as well as bolted it. But because you didn‟t tell him about the food I gave you,

I will tell you this. The child has gone to a wet nurse in the nearby hamlet. My

sister, in fact. He will be well there.‟

There was a scuffling, then she was gone. Tanya leaned her head

against the door in relief. So, for the time being at least, her son was safe.

Although he would never have a Christian baptism, she felt sure that heaven

would not reject him, for he was so young and innocent. This was the only

consolation she had over the next week. The days dragged by, and Tanya

longed for her son, at the same time glad he was away from this evil place.

She was concentrating on building up her strength, eating everything that

was given to her and making herself exercise a little every day. She began to

be able to walk a little again and, although still very weak, felt more able to

cope with her situation. She had begun to scratch marks on the wall to

account for the days, and with dread in her heart she watched them mount.

All too soon, twelve days had passed, and she had been given less than two

weeks! She had already made up her mind to do her best to kill her child,



Tanya

374

then herself, if only to frustrate Stevanov‟s evil purpose, but how she could

possibly do so was more than she knew.

The small fire continued to burn in the grate, although once it had died

down, it was not re-lit until the following day. Now that her strength had

returned to some degree, she would drag herself over to it and sit before it

enjoying the warmth. Boris had been late lighting it that morning, it had been

almost midday, and she had managed to keep it going with some straw and

bits and pieces of wood, so that she was pleased it was still alight when night

fell. It was while she was sitting in front of it, watching the flames licking

round the wood that a wild idea flashed across her mind. It was a crazy plan

but just might succeed! Anyway, she had nothing to lose. Gathering the

remnants of her strength, she pulled the wooden pallet over to the door and

managed to break off two of the rickety, half-rotten legs. Holding them in the

fire until they began to burn, she carried them over and set fire to the blanket,

then placed the legs underneath the capsized bed. Too late, she realised

that her cloak too was burning, but it was impossible then to retrieve it from

the flames, and she retreated to the window, away from the smoke, holding

her dress over her mouth and watching with her heart in her mouth. At first,

she thought the fire would not catch hold, but gradually, flames began to lick

up the wooden door, and soon it was blazing fiercely. She was hopeful that

her jailors would be asleep downstairs, or even out somewhere, and so fail to

hear the noise or suspect anything was amiss. When the door finally fell, the

noise was deafening, and she could not see how they could fail to hear, but

she was past caring now. She emptied her slop bucket over the fallen

beams, and they hissed, black smoke swirling up. Taking her courage in both

hands, she put her arms over her face and leapt over the charred timbers,



Tanya

375

through the fire still burning round the sides of the door. Pain shot up the

back of her legs and the soles of her feet, then she was throug h, and free!

She stumbled over to the stairs and began to make her painful way

down. Another crash from above told her that the door had now completely

collapsed, and loud crackling indicated that something else had caught fire,

but she paid no heed, exerting all her concentration in placing one foot in

front of the other. She made the first stage without incident, expecting at any

moment to see either Boris or Father Stevanov appear before her to drag her

back, but no one came. This floor appeared to be completely deserted. Her

heart thumping, Tanya began to descend the final, twisting flight of stairs,

clutching on to the wooden handrail – indeed, it was the only thing that was

keeping her on her feet. Distant crashing and wisps of smoke followed her

down the stairway. The fire seemed to have taken hold. With malicious

satisfaction, Tanya thought that at least no one else would suffer in this

dreadful place as she had done.

At last, the interminable stairway ended, and she was in the furnished

ground-floor rooms. Still everything was quiet, and with a sense of surprise,

Tanya realised that there was no one around at all, for all the doors stood

open. If she was to make good her escape, commonsense told her that she

would die outside in the bitter cold without some protection, so she forced

herself to step inside the nearest room. There was no doubt that this was

where Father Stevanov slept; his clothes lay scattered around as if he had

changed in a hurry. With a swift glance over her shoulder, Tanya crossed to

the closet. It was locked, but without hesitation, she grabbed a heavy

candlestick from the table and swung it with all her might. At the second

blow, the thin wood gave, and she pulled the splintered door open. Once



Tanya

376

again, she was drawing on resources o f strength she had not known she

possessed. Inside was a trunk, and flinging the lid back, Tanya pulled out a

large, embroidered bag with a drawstring top. It was heavy, and when she

opened it, she gave a gasp of delight. There, within, lay her jewels!

Suddenly, the thought of where she was came to her, and she cursed

herself. What was she doing, loitering here? She must find some protection

for herself and get out of here, find Nicholas, and run as far as she could.

Then her eyes fell on the other contents of the trunk. One was a jewelled

dagger which she snatched up thankfully, her fingers closing comfortingly

around the hilt. The other was the most beautiful cloak she had ever seen. It

was of a soft white velvet, lined with fur of the same colour, with a large, fur-

lined hood. She took it out, thankful to have found something to protect her

from the cold outside. Working swiftly now, she tore one of the blankets into

thin strips, and wound them around her bare feet, then clutching her new -

found spoils, she fled from the room without a backward glance. The hall was

filled with smoke, and she was coughing by the time she found the main

door. For a horrible moment, she thought it was locked, then it gave with a

protesting groan, and she was outside! She put the cloak on and pulled the

hood right over her head. It reached right down to her ankles, completely

enveloping her. Grateful for its warmth, she stood for a moment, drawing

deep, thankful breaths of the cold, clear air. The moon was full, sailing

majestically across the heavens, quenching the stars with its brilliance. Not

knowing which direction to take, Tanya began to stumble straight forward

agonisingly slowly. Glancing over her shoulder, she saw that the top of the

tower now glowed a dull red through the windows and felt a sense of

satisfaction. It had not been part of her original plan but could not be better!



Tanya

377

Head down, she stumbled on, hardly looking where she was going.

With a sickening shock, she suddenly realised that she could hear Father

Stevanov‟s voice. Her head jerked up, and she found herself staring at a

macabre sight, enough to chill the blood of the bravest soul.

Three figures were gathered in a ruined crypt, gesticulating around a

stone slab that had been made into some kind of altar. It was draped with

black cloth, and an obscene-looking gargoyle or carved head was resting on

it. A crucifix had been pinned upside down on the front, and Father Stevanov

himself, dressed in a strange long robe embroidered with weird symbols , was

intoning in front of it. Tanya stood frozen to the spot. Undoubtedly, this was

some sort of build-up to the awful deeds the unholy trio were planning for

herself and her son.

Even as she tensed her muscles to run, Father Stevanov turned and

caught sight of her standing straight in the moonlight. He froze for a moment,

unable to believe his eyes. His mumbling broke off, and he gave a choking

cry, stepping backwards, throwing his arm across his face, as though to ward

something off. His two companions too were frozen to the spot, ludicrous

expressions of shock registering on their faces.

Taking a firm hold of the dagger beneath the folds of the cloak, Tanya

made a decision. The world must be rid of this evil man, and she was the

one who must do it. She began to walk slowly towards him.

She had no idea of the effect her sudden appearance was having on

the priest. To him, seeing her suddenly standing there, tall and shining in the

moonlight, wearing the sacrificial cloak that he had used on so many victims

turned his blood cold. But that she, the one who had so many times foiled

him, the one who was too weak even to move should be wearing it meant



Tanya

378

only one thing to him. She must have died and was now coming to take her

revenge on him. Inexorably she advanced towards him across the snow,

seeming to glide over its smooth surface. With another choking cry, he

backed away, his mouth opening and shutting. He had been in a state of

semi-trance when she had made her unexpected appearance, and the shock

was too great.

He put his hands up to his throat, clawing at it, fighting for breath, then

screamed once. It was a horrible sound, rending the still night air.

Tanya stared in amazement as he dropped to the ground, twitching

convulsively, then she heard feet pounding behind her and , turning to run,

managed only a few paces before slipping and falling, dazing herself on the

hard-packed snow.

She was vaguely aware of the sound of a scuffle going on, then there

was a thud and another scream. Struggling up on to her hands and knees,

her astonished gaze took in the two bodies lying on the ground, the fat figure

of Olga running away, and the tall, slim young man, who dropped his sword

in the snow, running towards her. Hardly able to believe her eyes, she held

out her shaking hands.

„Peterkin,‟ she shrieked. „Oh God, Peterkin, is it really you?‟ She tried

to rise but couldn‟t find the strength. He dropped to his knees beside her and

held her against him as she began to cry, great racking sobs that tore at her

body. He made no attempt to stem her tears, knowing that it was the best

thing for her. At last, she had cried herself out and raised her tear-stained

face to him.

Shock swept over him as he looked at the white, gaunt face before

him. He would hardly have recognised her, so thin and ill did she look. She



Tanya

379

seemed to have no strength at all, and he picked her up in his arms. She

was as light as a feather, and with another sense of shock, he realised she

was no longer pregnant. With a feeling of pity, mingled with fear, he thought

that she must have lost her baby, for he had seen no sign of a child

anywhere. He had searched the ground floor of the house when he found the

door standing wide open but had been beaten back by the flames when he

had tried to go further. He had been standing irresolutely by the tower when

he had heard a horrible scream and had run in the direction from which it had

come. He had been in time to see the white-hooded figure turn to run, then

had been attacked by a huge man. He had drawn his sword and dispatched

the man without ceremony but made no attempt to chase the woman, for he

had known instinctively that the fallen figure was Tanya.

He started to carry her away, but she stopped him, clutching at his coat

with desperate strength.

„Wait, Peterkin. The other man – it‟s Stevanov. Please go and see what

has happened to him. You don‟t know how evil he is, he must die!‟

He became aware that she was clutching a dagger and set her down,

prising it loose from her rigid fingers.

„All right, all right, but stay here,‟ he replied and walking over to the still

body, turned it over with his foot. The look of frozen fear on the dead man‟s

face made him flinch, but he bent over the feel the heart. He returned to

Tanya, who had not moved.

„He‟s quite dead,‟ he said quietly. She stared at him blankly.

„I don‟t understand. I didn‟t touch him. How can he be dead? It‟s some

trick.‟



Tanya

380

Peterkin smiled grimly. „No, from the look of him, he died of something

other than a dagger – fear killed him!‟

„Fear?‟ queried Tanya. „Fear? But he was not afraid of me.‟

„Oh, but he was, believe me,‟ replied Peterkin. „Don‟t you understand?

That‟s why he sought you out, tried to destroy you. If he wasn‟t afraid of you,

he would have killed you weeks ago. He wanted to destroy your spirit, make

you grovel. It was your goodness he couldn‟t stand, that light that seems to

shine from you sometimes when you are fighting for what you know to be

right. I‟m betting he had some horrible end planned for you – am I right?‟

Tanya nodded mutely and gave a wan smile.

„So, it is done. Now poor Veda and all the other innocent victims

whose blood he spilt can rest in peace.‟ She gave a shiver, then her eyes

widened. „Nicholas,‟ she cried. „Peterkin, quickly, I must find Nicholas!‟

For a moment, he thought her mind was wandering, that she was

returning to the streets of Moscow, and he shook his head.

„Nicholas is dead, Tanya,‟ he said gently. „You must remember.‟

„What are you saying?‟ she screamed. „Do you know where he is –

have you seen him? They took him away from me, he was so tiny, so

helpless. Don‟t tell me I‟m too late, please, please.‟

He stared at her in bewilderment, then light dawned on his face.

„You‟re talking about your baby! I‟m sorry, Tanya, I thought it had all

been too much for you, and your mind was wandering. No, I haven‟t seen

your baby – as a matter of fact, I was beginning to fear the worst and think

that you had lost it. So you had a son! What a dreadful place for a

Dostoyevskiy to be born! You say they took him away? They haven‟t . . .

done anything to him, have they?‟



Tanya

381

Tanya began to cry again, hopelessly. „I don‟t know, Peterkin, I just

don‟t know. That is, they haven‟t killed him, if that‟s what you mean, for he

was going to do that either tomorrow or the day after, I‟m not sure. Oh,

Peterkin, he was going to use us both in some dreadful black magic

ceremony. He was going to murder my baby and make me watch, then . . .

then . . .‟ she broke off, unable to speak.

Peterkin looked at her with horror in his eyes and threw a glance over

his shoulder at the two bodies stiffening in the snow. He pulled himself

together.

„Well, we‟ll do no good standing here freezing, like a couple of fools.

Come, I have a horse tethered in the trees behind the house. I‟ll take you to

it, then we‟ll decide what to do.‟

He picked her up again and, wrapping the cloak tenderly around her

thin body, carried her easily past the now blazing ruin to where he had left

his horse. He lifted her up into the saddle and mounted behind her.

„Now, think carefully. Did they say anything of where the child might

be?‟

„Yes, that woman who ran away, Olga, she told me that they had taken

him to her sister, to wet-nurse him, for I had no milk to feed him, and he

would have died before that beast wanted him to. I think she said that the

sister lived in a nearby hamlet somewhere.‟

„So,‟ said Peterkin, „I passed through such a place about three miles

from here. We shall soon find him, never fear.‟

Tanya let herself relax against Peterkin as the horse cantered through

the snow. She could hardly believe that the nightmare was almost over, that

she was free. If only her son was safe, please God, if only he was safe.



Tanya

382

They quickly covered the distance and found the few clustered

peasant huts without difficulty. The place consisted of only about a dozen or

so miserable hovels and was probably a farming community of some sort.

Leaving Tanya in the saddle, Peterkin leapt down and hammered on

the door of the nearest hut. There was silence within, and he shouted,

banging louder. At last, the door opened, and a fearful face peered out. It

relaxed a little on seeing Peterkin standing there.

„ Do you know the big tower about three miles away over there?‟ asked

Peterkin indicating the way they had come, where an orange glow could now

be seen on the horizon.

The man crossed himself and nodded.

„Well, a woman in this village has a sister who worked over there.

Which is her house? Quickly now.‟

„I daren‟t, master,‟ quavered the man. „He‟ll put the evil eye on me.‟

„Rubbish,‟ said Peterkin impatiently. „Anyway, he can‟t, he‟s dead.‟

The man‟s eyes widened. „Are you sure?‟ he gasped unbelievingly.

„Of course, I am, you fool. See that glow in the sky over there? Well,

that‟s his place, burning to the ground. That lady‟, he indicated Tanya,

„overcame his evil. You‟ll see no more of him. Now quickly, man, tell me what

I want to know, or shall I choke it out of you?‟

The man indicated a small hut across the way and threw an awed

glance at the still, white figure in the saddle. „God bless you, lady,‟ he called,

then scuttled back inside and shut his door.

Peterkin scowled. „Superstitious fool,‟ he muttered and led the horse

over to the cottage the man had pointed out. „This is the place,‟ he said. „Wait

here.‟



Tanya

383

He hammered on the door, and this time, it was answered quickly.

Another frightened face peered out, this time a woman‟s.

„You are Olga‟s sister?‟ asked Peterkin tersely. The woman nodded.

„Then stand aside.‟

He lifted Tanya down from the horse, and supporting her with his arm

around her, he led her into the house. It was a typical peasant hovel, with

beds made up on top of the huge stove and two mangy goats rooting around

the dirty floor. Peterkin wrinkled his nostrils in disgust.

„You have a child here‟, he stated, „brought to you by your sister.‟

The woman shook her head sullenly. „Ain‟t got no child here, master,‟

she whined, rubbing a dirty sleeve across her face. Even as she spoke, a

wailing cry rose from a basket on top of the stove. The cry seemed to wake

Tanya from her trance, and she shook off Peterkin‟s arm and stumbled

across the room to look in the basket. Her eyes devoured the baby inside,

then with a screech of rage, she flew at the woman, pummelling and kicking.

„That‟s a girl child, you old hag,‟ she screamed. „What have you done

with my son?‟

Peterkin pulled her off, shaking her. „We‟ll get nowhere like that,‟ he

chided. „Calm down, Tanya, I‟ll soon get the truth out of her.‟

Grimly he advanced on the cringing woman. „Now listen,‟ he said

quietly. „The man who ordered you to take the child is dead. If you do not act

quickly and tell me where the baby is, you will find yourself in the same

condition.‟

She visibly wilted and, without a word, indicated a small door set in the

corner behind the stove. Tanya ran over to it, pushing it open with difficulty. It

was pitch dark inside.



Tanya

384

„Fetch me that candle,‟ she cried, and Peterkin handed it to her. She

took it, her hand trembling, then bent almost double and stepped through the

door. The room beyond was little more than a cupboard, filthy and reeking of

excreta. A large rat scuttled away from the light, and Tanya screamed. In the

corner, on a sort of rough shelf, lay a tiny form, its arms and chest covered in

bruises, its whole body covered in filth. Only the fact that it was on a shelf

above ground had saved it from the rats. Tanya screamed again and ran

forward, snatching the pathetic little bundle up in her arms.

„Nicholas, Nicholas,‟ she sobbed. „What have they done to you? My

poor baby, what have they done?‟

Peterkin pushed her out of the filthy room, appalled.

„Give him to me,‟ he said and prised the infant away from her clutching

hands. He put the child down on a blanket on top of the stove and laid his

head on its chest.

He looked up, hope in his eyes. „Tanya, listen, the child lives. He‟s still

alive.‟

Slowly the words sank in. She looked wildly at him. „What must I do?‟

she cried pathetically.

He looked towards the woman, who cringed away from him. „You

bitch,‟ he said coldly. „How could you do such a thing to an innocent child?‟

„He cried,‟ she whined. „He just cried and cried. Wouldn‟t stop. It was

more than flesh and blood could stand. I only had enough milk for my own

child, and what I had left, he kept sucking up. Anyway, it would have been

dead soon enough, from what Olga said.‟

She trailed off, aware of the ugly look on Peterkin‟s face.



Tanya

385

Tanya stopped him as he took a step towards her. „Never mind her,‟

she cried impatiently. „What about my baby?‟ She seemed to pull herself

together somewhat and walked up to the woman.

„Now listen to me, you old hag,‟ she said slowly. „You and I are going to

do everything we can to save my baby‟s life. If he dies, so shall you – a life

for a life! Do you understand me?‟

Stark fear on her face now, the woman nodded. „Right,‟ said Tanya

briskly. „Do you have any goat‟s milk ready?‟

The woman nodded, indicating a bucket in the corner.

„Good,‟ said Tanya. „Now you go over and set water to boil on the

stove. Peterkin, you get that pan and fill it with milk, then put that on to boil

too.‟

She bent over her child whilst they were busy, chafing the warmth

back into his wasted limbs, tears running down her cheeks. She sent the

woman off to find a goatskin bag, which she boiled in the water, then made a

tiny hole in the bottom. She had Peterkin pour some milk into it, then gently

she began to try to feed the baby, holding the bag to its mouth and forcing

the milk through the hole. At first, the milk just ran out of the corners of his

mouth, and she looked at Peterkin with despair in her eyes. The woman

pushed her aside and dipped her little finger in the milk . „Here,‟ she said

roughly, and put her finger in the child‟s mouth. He stirred slightly and

seemed to suck the milk from her finger. Tanya began to do the same, and

Nicholas began to suck, slowly at first, then more greedily. She transferred

the bag to his mouth, and he coughed, tiny fists raised in protest, then began

to suck in earnest, gulping down the milk. Tanya looked at Peterkin, a lump

in her throat, and saw that even he had tears in his eyes.



Tanya

386

When she considered that he had had enough for now, Tanya

improvised a bath in an old cauldron and gently bathed away the caked dirt

from his body. This he took instant exception to and howled his protest lustily

through the whole performance, but his cries were like music to Tanya‟s

ears.

When he was clean, she tore up one of the woman‟s petticoats and

made swaddling clothes of sorts, wrapping him up warmly, then she gave

him the rest of the milk. Soon he was sleeping peacefully, his tiny face

flushed and cherubic.

Tanya threw herself into Peterkin‟s arms. „He‟s going to be all right,‟

she cried. „He‟s going to live! It‟s amazing how tough babies can be.‟

„We‟ll stay here tonight,‟ decided Peterkin. „You badly need rest, and

we can‟t move the child yet. Get some sleep, I‟ll watch over you both.‟

She smiled mistily at him. „Thank you, Peterkin,‟ she whispered. „How

churlish you must think me, I haven‟t even said thank you. But I say it now,

from the bottom of my heart.‟

„You did the same for me, once,‟ he replied self-consciously. „Strange

that it should be the same evil man both times. But at least, we can be sure

our paths will never cross again.‟

He lifted her up on to the blanket beside the child, and she sank

immediately into a deep, exhausted sleep. The woman fed her own child,

then curled up in the corner a nd was soon asleep too. Peterkin sat in a chair

by the stove, dozing.

The next thing he knew, a cock was crowing nearby, and he groaned,

standing up and stretching his cramped limbs, then gave a start, for , of the



Tanya

387

woman and her baby there was no sign. Tanya and Nicholas were still

sleeping. He shrugged his shoulders. „Good riddance,‟ he muttered and

quietly set about preparing something to eat. He found some stew in one of

the large pots and set it on to warm. The appetising smell soon awoke

Tanya, and she sat up, looking blankly around; then her gaze fell on her son,

and her face lit up. She hugged her knees like a child, in sheer delight.

„Oh, I can scarcely believe it. We‟re free and safe, both of us. Oh,

Peterkin, I have so much to ask you, I don‟t know where to start.‟ Her face

clouded.

„Where do you suppose Ivan is, Peterkin? Does he know where I am –

or doesn‟t he care?‟

Peterkin looked uncomfortable. „I don‟t know,‟ he admitted. „I paid

someone well to go to his house and tell him of all that had happened. I gave

him a letter and told him if he gave it to the Count, he would receive the

same amount again, to ensure that he did as he was told, but I‟ve heard

nothing. Of course‟, he added hastily, „I‟ve been so busy following your trail

and losing it so many times, I‟ve been round in circles, and he could have

had no idea where any of us were. When we get back to Moscow, it will all

be explained.‟

Tanya looked at him doubtfully. „We don‟t even know if I have the

Tsar‟s permission to return. Still, nothing‟s going to keep me away, we‟ll

worry about that when we get there. Where are we now, anyway? Do you

know, I have no idea!‟

„We are right up in the wilds of Siberia,‟ replied Peterkin. „The nearest

town is Tobolsk, where I have left Yvette with the sleigh and baggage. As



Tanya

388

soon as I found out where Stevanov‟s place was, I left them there and came

as fast as I could. It‟s only a day‟s journey from here‟.

„ Yvette!‟ exclaimed Tanya. „Of course, I had forgotten. Oh, Peterkin,

do you know what Stevanov tried to make me believe? That Yvette was

working for him, always had been, and that she gave him my jewels, that she

had been reporting my movements to him all along. I didn‟t believe him, I

couldn‟t, but . . . Peterkin, how did he get the jewels?‟

„Well,‟ answered Peterkin shortly. „I know it sounds far-fetched, but it

seems he put some sort of spell on her – made her do it against her will,

made her tell him all sorts of things, then forget it had ever happened.‟

Light dawned on Tanya‟s face. „Of course,‟ she breathed. „I‟ve heard of it. It‟s

bending someone‟s will to your own by fixing them with your eyes or a

moving object. I can quite believe he could do it, I‟ve felt it myself sometimes,

when I‟ve looked at him – I felt it quite strongly when we first met, at Sudzal,

but not so much lately. I wonder why he didn‟t do it to me.‟

„He couldn‟t, I should imagine,‟ replied Peterkin. „That‟s another reason

why he was afraid of you.‟

„Well, I don‟t understand it at all,‟ said Tanya with a shrug. „But I knew

Yvette could not possibly consort with his kind, she is too honest and good.

Oh, Peterkin, is that stew ready yet, I‟m starving?‟

They made a good meal, Tanya eating as though she would never

stop. Between mouthfuls, she told him something of the dreadful time she

had had, and his brow grew black with rage as she unfolded her story.

„It hardly seems possible that anyone could be so abominable ,‟ he

said, shaking his head. „I guess you must be under some lucky star to have

escaped as you did. If only you had known I was almost there to get you out.‟



Tanya

389

„Yes, but the door had a key as well as bolts, and he had started taking

that away with him,‟ objected Tanya. „Anyway, we might not have managed

to get rid of Stevanov then, and that makes it all worthwhile, although I think

he got off pretty lightly, considering.‟

On this gruesome note, she cheerfully wiped her bowl round and

patted her full stomach. „Mm, I don‟t think I‟ll ever be able to get enough to

eat again, to make up for these past months,‟ she said, then jumped to her

feet as a wail from Nicholas informed them that he too was hungry.

They went through the same procedure as before, and Nicholas drank

all his milk placidly and went back to sleep. It was almost as if he knew his

mother was there to look after him, as there was nothing fretful about him at

all now.

They heated more milk and filled two goatskin bags, wrapping them in

cloths to keep warm; then Tanya bathed and changed the baby, whilst

Peterkin milked the nanny goat, which was bleating its distress at having

been abandoned by its owner.

Soon they had the horse loaded up, and Tanya showed Peterkin the

embroidered bag with most of her jewels still inside. He was surprised, as he

had thought they had been lost in the fire, for Tanya had forgotten all about

them in the excitement of finding her baby. They stored them away in the

bottom of the pannier and on top placed bread and cheese and the child‟s

milk. Peterkin lifted them both up on to the horse, wrapping the cloak around

them, then mounting up, they set off without a backward glance.

They reached high ground, and Peterkin reined in. Far in the distance,

they could see the still smoking ruin of the building that had been Tanya‟s

prison. Without a word, they turned their backs and rode away. With only a



Tanya

390

quick stop for food and to feed the child, they made quite good time,

although the heavily laden horse could not go very fast, and it was quite dark

as they at last rode into the small town where Peterkin had left Yvette. There

was only one modest inn, and they left the horse with the stable boy, after

removing the pannier containing Tanya‟s precious jewels, then hurried up to

the rooms where Yvette was anxiously waiting.

She took one look at her mistress and then they fell into one another‟s

arms, sobbing. Nicholas chose that moment to awaken and join in, and

Peterkin threw his hands over his ears in laughing protest.

„Hold on, hold on, or you‟ll have me crying too,‟ he cried.

Yvette then threw herself into his arms, laughing and crying at the

same time. „I‟ve been so worried, I‟ve not slept a wink since you left,‟ she

sobbed. „I can‟t believe you‟re all here, and safe. Oh, and the beautiful baby

too. Oh, madame, I never thought I‟ d see you again.‟

Foreseeing a fresh outburst of tears, Peterkin hastily pointed out the

baby‟s need, and the two women were soon bustling about happily preparing

his feed.

By this time, Yvette had taken in her mistress‟s appearance and was

obviously horrified. As soon as it was decently possible, she ordered a hip

bath of hot water to be brought up, and she was soon shooing Peterkin from

the room. She peeled off Tanya‟s clothes, wrinkling her nose in disgust.

‘ Oh, madame, what has that evil man done to you. Poor, poor thing,

you are so thin and wasted, and you‟re crawling with lice!‟ She shuddered

and rapidly set about washing her mistress as she lay back luxuriously in the

hot, scented water.



Tanya

391

‘ I would never have believed a bath could be so heavenly,‟ she

murmured drowsily. „I‟ve forgotten what it‟s like to be clean. Do you have

anything I can wear? ’

‘ Well, Peterkin told me to pack an overnight bag when we left that

place in such a hurry, after you disappeared,‟ she confided, „but I‟ m not such

a numbskull as to take him literally. I packed a bit more than that, including

some undergarments and dresses for you. It made me a little more sure we

would really find you, too. Please now, tell me everything. I‟m dying to know

what has been happening to you. ’

So Tanya told her story again as Yvette listened with popping eyes.

She was even more horrified than Peterkin and kept exclaiming , „Well, I

never . . .‟ until Tanya laughingly told her to stop.

She was soon dressed again, although to Yvette‟s consternation, the

gown was at least two sizes too big, and she rushed off to get pins to make it

look more presentable. Whilst she dried her hair by the fire, dreamily

brushing it out and staring into the flames, Yvette bustled about disposing of

the dirty water and ordering the servants about who were laying the table for

the meal Peterkin had ordered.

Soon they were all seated around the table, toasting one another in

vodka and laughing at nothing. Tanya ate the delicious food, savouring each

mouthful as though it was her last. How happy she would have been if only a

fourth person could have sat there with them! How long it seemed since she

had last seen him! Sometimes she had the nightmarish feeling that fate had

decreed they would never have the happiness of being together again. All

the wasted years that had been lost since she had first met him, years when

they should have been united, loving each other, instead of fighting. Silently,



Tanya

392

Tanya vowed to herself that should she be lucky enough to find him and

lucky enough to still have his love, she would never allow him to leave her

again, but somehow the thought of her vigorous husband following her

around like a lapdog was so funny that she gave a sad smile, then realising

that she had fallen silent, and her companions were looking at her anxiously,

she sighed and began to talk of what their plans should be.

They decided to set out at once for Moscow, but to do the journey in

easy stages, as the baby would need attention, and Tanya still had to get

back her strength – and her looks, she thought wryly, after the shock of

seeing herself in a mirror. They asked the advice of the inn keeper as to the

best way to get to Moscow, and he advised them that the Babinov Road

would take them safely all the way to Moscow. He told them of the string of

forts protecting travellers on the road, culminating at Verkhoturye in the Ural

mountains. From there the road would take them on the last leg of their

journey all the way to Moscow. He promised to organise the purchase of a

carriage and horses and a coachman to drive them as Peterkin still had most

of the money left with him by the Count, and they also had Tanya‟s jewels if

they needed them.

Both Tanya and Peterkin were looking very weary, so Yvette soon had

her mistress tucked up warmly in the small adjoining room, saying that for

this night she would take care of Nicholas. For once, Tanya made no demur,

for she knew she must get some rest. Before she left, Yvette, looking

extremely uncomfortable, began an awkward, involved explanation of how

Father Stevanov had used her, but Tanya silenced her with a quick hug, said

she knew all about it, and now they were going to forget that evil man and

put the past behind them. Yvette gave her a grateful smile and went silently



Tanya

393

out. Peterkin was already in bed, fast asleep, tired out after spending the

previous night in the uncomfortable chair at Tobolsk. She smiled fondly down

at him, then checked Nicholas, fast asleep in the small trunk they had made

into a bed for him. She also checked quickly that the jewels were back in the

secret compartment of the big trunk she had brought with her. She could

hardly believe that they had got them back, as well as her mistress and her

beautiful baby. Just think of the master‟s face when he found out he was a

father!

„If only we can find the Count again, to bring the light back into

Tanya‟s eyes, then everything will be perfect, I know it will,‟ she thought. „But

where is he? Will we be able to find him? Poor Tanya, she has had so much

unhappiness, been through so much, we just have to find him and bring them

together again!‟



Tanya

394

Chapter 15

Dusk was falling as the tired horses pulled the coach up to the gates of

Moscow. The journey had taken longer than they had anticipated, and

everyone‟s nerves were on edge, Tanya having become more and more

agitated as they neared the capital.

She had used the long journey as a time of renewal: to regain her

strength and her looks and to bond with her son. The carriage was

comfortable and the snows were beginning to thaw, so although the start of

the journey was difficult, they were soon into warmer climes, and they had

changed horses at the various forts along the way. Once Verkhoturye was

reached and they left the Ural Mountains behind, they found summer had

already begun, the frozen north left far behind. The air was humid, and the

interior of the coach was airless and stuffy. The roads in places were a

quagmire, and the occupants were shaken and rattled in places. Although

travelling with a baby had been challenging, Nicholas was a happy and

contented child, seeming to understand that he was now safe and loved, and

Tanya would marvel at the love she felt overflowing when she held him in her

arms. However, even Nicholas had had enough of the journey when at last

the spires of Moscow appeared in the distance, and Tanya‟s nerves began to

jump. The guards opened the gates swiftly on seeing Peterkin‟s papers, for

the Count ranked high in Moscow. As the coach clattered through the

cobbled streets, Peterkin frowned wearily.

‘ I still say we would have done better to have gone straight to the

Count‟s house and checked there for news – we know nothing of the

situation here, he may even be there waiting, for all we know.‟



Tanya

395

Tanya shook her head impatiently.

„No, no, I told you, he wouldn‟t be there kicking his heels, the Tsar sent

for him to return from Paris for a reason – something about Narva, I don‟t

remember exactly, but I‟m sure he‟s not there. He wouldn‟t be sitting at

home, he would have come for me. Besides, it‟s another day‟s journey there,

and I must know what is happening. The Kremlin is the best place to find

out.‟

Peterkin sighed. „But we don‟t even know if you have permission to be

here, you may be in grave danger.‟

„I don‟t care,‟ snapped Tanya. „I don‟t care about anything any more

except finding Ivan.‟

No one spoke again until the sweating horses passed through the

outer gate of the Kremlin walls and into the courtyard. Peterkin jumped out

and hailed a guard lounging against the wall.

„Ho there, guard. The Countess Dostoyevskiy is in the coach and

wishes to speak with the Tsar. Call your officer and have us taken inside.‟

The guard coughed and spat reflectively.

„Well, now, your honour, I‟ll take your word for it, but you won‟t see the

Tsar.‟

Tanya stuck her head out of the window.

‘ What are you talking about, you dolt?‟ she cried furiously. „Do as you

are bid.‟

He straightened up a little at the sound of her authoritative voice, but

shook his head.



Tanya

396

‘ I‟m sorry, madame, I don‟t know where you‟ve been, but the Tsar and

all his officers have been away for weeks, fighting the Swedes. There‟s only

a few of us left here.‟

Tanya‟s heart sank. She had come so far and was keyed up to such a

pitch she could have wept. She stared blankly at the vacant face of the

guard, and it was Peterkin who spoke.

„Well, call your officer, man, and find someone for the Countess to see.

Who‟s in charge here?‟

„Count Tolstoy, sir,‟ answered the guard, coming to attention at last. „I‟ll

call the officer.‟

Tanya instructed Yvette to remain in the courtyard with Nicholas, and

within a surprisingly short space of time, they were ensconced in one of the

numerous small rooms leading from the audience chamber in the Kremlin.

The place was still crawling with the usual motley collection of clerks, priests ,

and courtiers, although the air of hushed expectancy was missing, the

atmosphere seeming lighter somehow, and Tanya was glad for the privacy.

The sight of these familiar rooms and passageways had struck her almost

like a blow. How vivid were the memories that came flooding back, even after

all this time! She could see Erik before her clearly now, his dark eyes

mocking her, and she seemed to hear his voice calling her name as she had

last heard it, echoing round Execution Square. She was almost sure that a

certain alcove they had passed was the very one where she had received

her first bitter sweet kiss from Ivan, and she chided herself for a fool.

She paced up and down the small room impatiently and swung round

eagerly when at last the door opened to admit a flunkey.



Tanya

397

‘ If the Countess would follow me please, Count Tolstoy will see her

now,‟ he said and held the door for her. Peterkin started forward, but Tanya

shook her head at him and squeezed his hand. Whatever was to come, she

would prefer to face it alone.

She followed the flunkey through the usual endless maze of corridors

until at last she was ushered into a study. For a moment she thought she

was alone, then was startled as a slight figure detached itself from the

shadows and, stepping forward, turned up the lamp.

„Your pardon, madame, if I frightened you.‟

The quiet, cultured voice of the Tsar‟s chief counsellor struck a little

chord of comfort in Tanya‟s heart, and she smiled nervously. She

remembered him slightly from her sojourn in Moscow as Princess

Mensherikovsky but had had little to do with him, her husband preferring

other company to that of the dry, witty count.

Count Andrew Tolstoy polished his monocle and regarded her

quizzically, one mobile eyebrow raised.

„To what do we owe this unexpected pleasure, Countess?‟ he asked

formally.

Tanya began to pace again, wondering how to begin. His eyes

followed her for a moment, then he pulled out a chair.

„Allow me to offer you a seat, madame, and my congratulations.‟

She looked at him sharply. „Congratulations?‟

„Why yes. The last time I saw you, you were in very sad straits. Yes,

very sad.‟ He shook his head thoughtfully, pursing his lips. „I honestly didn‟t

think I would ever have the privilege of gazing upon your fair face again, after

your spectacular, er, departure.‟



Tanya

398

„You mean, after I escaped from the depths of the Kremlin dungeons,

after having been condemned to death for treason?‟ stated Tanya baldly,

having neither the inclination nor the patience for fencing.

His eyebrow flew up again, and he indicated the chair.

„Precisely, madame. Please sit down, and allow me to offer you a

glass of wine. May I say that it is a privilege to speak to such a gallant lady.

I‟m glad you made out so well.‟

Tanya flushed and looked at him uncertainly, then sat down and

spread her skirts as composedly as she could. She folded her hands and

fixed him with a direct look.

„I must tell you, sir,‟ she began, „firstly that I love my husband very

much, and secondly that I don‟t know what my position here is, and frankly, I

don‟t care. I have come here purely for one reason. To find out where my

husband is and to throw myself at his feet. I don‟t even know if he wants me

any more, but I have to find him, I just have to.‟

He poured her a glass of wine in silence and handed it to her.

„Please accept my apologies, madame,‟ he said abruptly. „I believe I

have misjudged you. I will tell you all I know. Firstly, I will put your mind at

rest on one thing. The Tsar gave his permission for you to return to Russia

as the Countess Dostoyevskiy, and a messenger was dispatched to fetch

you. He returned empty-handed and reported that there was no sign of you

or your companions. All the innkeeper could say was that you all left

abruptly, without even taking all your baggage. He understood someone had

been sent from there with some sort of message from your party to the

Count, but that message never arrived. ’



Tanya

399

‘ But Ivan,‟ interrupted Tanya, looking at him with painful intensity, „did

he make no effort to find out what had happened to me?‟

The Count fiddled with the stem of his glass and frowned pensively.

„Count Dostoyevskiy was not here when the messenger returned,‟ he

said abruptly. „The Tsar sent him to Narva to sound out the strength of the

enemy. He has used him for this purpose many times, as he trusts him

implicitly. He sent for him particularly in this case, as he was often in Sweden

before the war began, and he knows the various dialects and can pass

himself off as a native. He had been to Narva before, it should have been

relatively simple for him to slip inside and sound out the situation there.‟

„So that was it,‟ sighed Tanya. „He knew nothing of what had

happened to me. He didn‟t see anyone, he didn‟t renounce me, he didn‟t.‟

Suddenly, her heart was singing, for although she had refused to

believe the evil Stevanov, yet deep down inside, the fear had gnawed,

despite herself. She clasped her hands and sat forward in the chair eagerly.

„Oh tell me, sir, where is he now? Is he with the Tsar? Why has he not

tried to find out what had happened to me?‟

Tolstoy cleared his throat a nd looked acutely uncomfortable, for it fell

to him to quench the blaze of joy that was shining from her eyes.

„I regret to inform you, madame , that no word has been heard from the Count

for many weeks. He managed to send out a message about the fortifications,

numbers of men, that sort of thing, but nothing further had been heard. Under the

circumstances, I am afraid the worst must be feared.‟

The colour drained slowly from Tanya‟s cheeks, and she leaned back in the

chair, looking dazed.



Tanya

400

„What are you saying?‟ she whispered through stiff lips. „I don‟t believe you.

Why are you saying these things?‟

„I am sorry, madame,‟ he spoke gravely and looked at her with pity in his

usually cold eyes. „Nothing, of course, is certain. We have heard no news of him at

all, but then the gates are fast shut, and even now, the Tsar and his army are

massing to take the city. The Tsar has sworn to do so since his humiliating defeat

there, and I do not envy the citizens of Narva when the town falls – as it must.‟

Tanya looked at him wildly.

„What do I care of the citizens of Narva?‟ she cried impatiently. „But while there

is a chance Ivan is alive, somewhere within its walls, I‟ll not sit here idly. I don‟t

believe he is dead, if he was, I would feel it here.‟ She struck herself on the breast,

then jumped to her feet.

„I must leave immediately,‟ she cried and passed a shaking hand across her

brow.

„I would not recommend it, my dear Countess,‟ he answered quietly. „It will be

no place for a lady, believe me.‟

„What do I care?‟ cried Tanya fiercely. „Worse has happened to me than

anything the Swedes could do. Nothing shall keep me away, nothing!‟

He looked at her searchingly for a moment, then leaned back in his chair.

„Very well, madame,‟ he said. „Against my better judgment, I will not stand in

your way. However, it is extremely inadvisable to set out right now. For a start, the

city gates have already been closed for the night, and if you will wait until tomorrow, I

will furnish you with papers which will assist you to reach the Tsar as quickly as

possible. Right now, I suggest you return to your companions, inform them of what

has happened, and then return to give me the pleasure of your company at dinner.‟

She looked at him blankly .



Tanya

401

‘ Dinner? I couldn‟t eat a thing.‟

„Come, come, Countess, you will change your mind presently, I have

no doubt. You are looking considerably thinner and paler than the last time I

saw you. You will forgive my forwardness, I am sure, but I should very much

like to know exactly where you have been and what you have been doing. I

should be honoured by your confidences.‟

Tanya‟s shoulders sagged, and with a wry look, she capitulated.

„I am sorry, sir, you must think I am dreadfully rude,‟ she said. „I can

only plead my excessive anxiety over the last few months. Perhaps when

you have heard my story, you will understand a little better. I should certainly

like to refresh myself and change my clothes. I should be delighted to join

you for dinner.‟

He bowed over her hand with rare grace, and she followed a servant to

the room which had been allotted to her. She sent for Yvette who brought her

son to her. She kissed him and held him against her breast, her heart aching

as she saw how already the resemblance to his father was showing, then

handed him back to Yvette who promised to see to his needs.

Soon she was soaking away her aches and pains in the scented water

of her bath. She had never lost the almost sensual delight she felt in bathing,

a relic of the days when a quick wash in the icy water of a pump was all she

could hope for, and of course, without a doubt, the ordeal of the last few

months had renewed it.

She didn‟t speak at all, and although Yvette was burning with curiosity,

she dared not speak, for Tanya looked so white and strange. She dressed

her and arranged her hair, all in silence.



Tanya

402

‘ I‟m dining with Count Tolstoy,‟ Tanya informed her eventually. „Please

send for Peterkin.‟

Peterkin arrived quickly, and it was obvious he had been anxiously

awaiting a summons. One look at Tanya‟s face was enough to inform him

that all was not well.

„Peterkin, Count Dostoyevskiy is missing,‟ stated Tanya flatly, as soon

as the three of them were alone. „That is why he made no attempt to find me.

Your messenger never arrived here at all, anyway.‟ Rapidly, she informed

them of what she had learnt. Throughout, she maintained an obvious, fierce

belief that Ivan was still alive. Peterkin accepted with equanimity the

information that he and Tanya were leaving for Narva first thing in the

morning. Then she turned to Yvette.

„I am asking much of you, I know, in taking your husband away, but I

must ask more of you. I‟m truly sorry, but please Yvette, will you take

Nicholas to his father‟s estates and wait there until I can bring Ivan home to

him? You are the only one I can trust to look after him properly for me, a nd I

can‟t expose him to the dangers ahead. I know I have ruined your married

life. You haven‟t even had the chance of a proper honeymoon yet because of

me, and now I‟m separating you again. I‟ll make it up to you, I promise. When

Ivan comes home, if you wish it, we‟ll give you a house of your own,

servants, and money, whatever you want. Nothing is too great to repay all

that you have done for me. ’

The couple exchanged embarrassed glances and murmured their

thanks. Privately, each was thinking that the chances of Ivan ever returning

were slim, indeed, but neither would have dreamt of voicing their thoughts.



Tanya

403

Yvette promised to take Nicholas to the Count‟s home, and Tanya

wrote a letter to the housekeeper there to explain about Nicholas. Peterkin

and Tanya then discussed the best plan of campaign for tomorrow. It would

take them about three weeks to reach Narva. They were just trying to decide

which way would be quickest when Tanya was summoned to dine with Count

Tolstoy.

She was soon eating some of the best food the Kremlin kitchens could

supply. The Count regarded her with amusement as she worked her way

through several courses with unflagging appetite. He entertained her with a

flow of the latest news of the war and of the Tsar‟s exploits. At last, she

leaned back in her chair with a satisfied sigh and began munching scented

nuts from a bowl at her elbow. She caught the Count‟s eye and laughed.

‘ You must think me a dreadful pig. I‟m making up for lost time. Would

you really like to hear what has been happening to me since I left Moscow?‟

He nodded gravely. „Nothing would give me greater pleasure ,‟ he said

courteously.

The Count was a good listener, and Tanya gave him a shortened

version of her adventures, keeping the more private details to herself. When

she had finished, he refilled their glasses and, leaning back, regarded her

thoughtfully over the rim of his glass.

„If it were not for the fact that, I am sure, no one could have invented

such a story, I would never have believed it,‟ he said eventually. „You are a

very lucky young woman to be sitting here at all. ’

‘ I don‟t feel very lucky at the moment,‟ replied Tanya in a small voice.

„After what you told me earlier, I don‟t feel anything very much, except an

overwhelming desire to get to Narva as soon as possible.‟



Tanya

404

„You won‟t change your mind then?‟ Tolstoy asked quizzically.

Tanya sat up straight, almost knocking the bowl of nuts over in her

agitation. „ No, no,‟ she cried. „Don‟t say you‟ve changed yours, please.‟

„No, I won‟t go back on my word, but I still strongly advise against it.

You will forgive my brutal frankness, but the chances of your finding your

husband alive and well are virtually nil.‟

Tears started to well up in Tanya‟s eyes. „Don‟t say it, please, I‟m not

even thinking any further than just getting there. I think I‟d go quietly mad if I

stayed here doing nothing.‟

He nodded. „Yes, you‟re probably right, but remember what I have said.

Don‟t let it be too great a blow if you don‟t find him.‟

On that sombre note, the Count rose. „I hope you will forgive my

leaving you now, Countess, but affairs of state unfortunately will not wait, and

the Tsar has left much in my hands. I have arranged for a coach to leave as

soon, after daybreak, as you are ready. I have detailed two guards to ride

with you and a coachman to drive you. I will send the necessary papers to

your room. Just ring the bell if you need anything. May I wish you good luck

in your search, and God go with you.‟ He bowed over her hand and left.

Tanya sat quietly in her chair, staring unseeingly at the rich hangings

covering the walls. Out there somewhere, she was sure, Ivan was living and

breathing; nothing would ever convince her otherwise – only the sight of his

lifeless body would make her give up the search! She ignored the bell but

slipped out of the room alone, flitting through the corridors like a ghost. She

felt a strong desire to be alone, somewhere where the night wind blew and ,

finding an ascending staircase, followed its twisting spiral upwards. It was

one of the outer towers of the palace, and she climbed higher and higher



Tanya

405

until she was panting for breath. She had not passed a soul at this late hour,

for with the Tsar away, and most of his Court at their summer houses away

from the city heat, the Kremlin was strangely empty.

At last, she reached the top of the stairs and stepped out on to the

battlement, drawing in great gulps of the balmy night air. How beautiful

Moscow looked in the moonlight! The clear silver moonlight and deep black

shadows hid the sordid sights that during the day robbed the city of its good

qualities. The beggars and thieves that Tanya knew about all too well were

hidden from sight, though she knew they were thronging the dark alleyways

and back streets. Even the Kremlin itself looked peaceful, although Tanya

knew from its outer walls hung numerous bodies, rotting in their rusty chains

whilst the Kremlin vultures sat by, disdainfully, knowing that fresher meat

would be provided on the morrow. She shuddered and turned her back on

the gleaming towers and minarets spread out before her. She turned,

instead, to the west, her heart winging its way over the long miles towards

Nyenskans – or Petersburg as the Tsar had ordered it to be called. It was

there that Peter and his army were gathering, ready to advance towards

Narva and avenge the defeat that he had never forgotten. Tomorrow she

would be free of this city that she could never really like, she had too many

bad memories of it. The only good thing that had happened to her here was

meeting Ivan. All her life before he had come into it seemed to blur into

unreality. She must find him! So, Tanya stood high on the rooftop of the

Kremlin, her whole being straining towards the man she loved. What would

the future bring? Of one thing Tanya was sure – if Ivan was dead, then for

her there was no future at all!



Tanya

406





Chapter 16


A rather worse jolt than usual awoke Tanya from an uneasy sleep, and

she groaned, stretching her cramped limbs. Peterkin was fast asleep in the

far corner, and she envied him.

The last two weeks had seemed more like two years to Tanya, chafing

in the hot stuffy interior of the coach. Again and again, she cursed herself for

not bringing a horse to ride – how she longed to be outside, galloping in the

sunshine. She had even toyed with the idea of asking one of the guards to let

her ride his horse, but the thought of the shock they would all feel held her

back. Besides, she had no riding habit with her and could scarcely ride on a

man‟s saddle in a gown made more for the Court of Paris than for horseback.

So she resigned herself to the boredom, contenting herself with occasional

demands for the coachman to go faster.

The roads were dreadful, and quite often, the occupants of the coach

felt as though every bone in their bodies was being broken, for the coach

provided was not as well sprung as it might have been. Tanya wished now

that they had decided to go by river as far as they could, but it was useless to

repine, and the journey was two-thirds over after all. They had passed

through Novgorod, the bustling, thriving town where people from all walks of

life and many different nationalities traded their goods, and bought and sold.

They stayed there overnight, then set out on the last stage of their journey,

and now the scenery was wild and forbidding as they swept on towards St

Petersburg where the Tsar had built a fortress on the banks of the Neva

River, and it was here that he had gathered his army for his assault on

Narva, four years after the defeat that still was like a thorn in his side.



Tanya

407

Now that they were nearing their destination, Tanya began to feel

almost sick with apprehension. She found herself wishing, against all

inclination, that the journey could go on for ever. The interior of the coach

against which she had been chafing suddenly became a haven that she was

loath to leave for fear of what she would discover at the end of the

interminable journey. But the miles were eaten up, and the days slipped

inexorably by. The two occupants of the coach were mostly silent, each

wrapped up in their own thoughts. It was the last night‟s journey, and late

tomorrow they would arrive at Petersburg. Tanya‟s plan was to contact the

Tsar as soon as possible and persuade him to let her go with him to Narva,

then when the town had fallen, as everyone seemed convinced it would, she

must try somehow to find out what had happened to Ivan. For the first time,

she allowed herself to admit that the chances of ever being reunited with her

husband were not good, and a deep depression swept over her. What would

she do without him? She would be quite alone again, and the thought was

crushing.

Then, with a lightening of spirit, she thought of Nicholas. She would

always have a part of Ivan in their son, and she would give her life to him. He

would have the best of everything she could give, and she would make him

into a man Ivan would be proud to call his son.

So the coach bowled on through the fading light, nearing the strife-torn

border between Russia and Sweden. But unknown to the travellers, it was

heading towards disaster! The first the driver knew of impending danger was

the sudden, vague outline of a large boulder in the centre of the road.

Swearing under his breath, he did his best to stop the horses, pulling on the

reins with all his strength, but their speed was too great, and the frightened



Tanya

408

animals swerved to avoid the obstacle, and the coach swung around. With a

sickening crash, the side of the coach smashed into the rock.

Tanya heard the crash and the sound of splintering glass, then oblivion

overcame her as she was flung across the coach, where her head caught on

one of the food cupboard doors which had swung open. She was therefore

spared the alarming sight of the large group of horsemen who galloped out

from the cover of the thicket where they had been hiding, waiting for the

coach their spies had already informed them was on the way. As this was the

only road from Novgorod to Petersburg, it was used by the merchants who

supplied the fortress with goods, plying their trade between the inland town

and the coast, and the brigands who lived by preying on these hapless

travellers had rich plunder. Whooping and yelling, they swarmed over the

guards and the coach. Count Tolstoy‟s men fought well but were soon

overwhelmed by sheer weight of numbers. The moon disappeared behind a

cloud, and one of the men lit a torch, holding it high for his comrades to

search the wrecked coach. They ignored the crumpled body of Peterkin lying

huddled in the corner, but there was an outburst of cheering as the light from

the torch picked out the pale, unconscious form of Tanya. She moaned

slightly and moved her head, turning her face towards the light. The leader of

the group, a tall, lean man with a scar disfiguring an otherwise not uncomely

face gave a low whistle and dropped to his knees beside her, his eyes

devouring the lovely face.

„Well, lads, we seem to have struck lucky this time. What a prize!‟

He looked over his shoulder, his eyes narrowing as he saw the naked

lust standing out on the faces of his rough band of followers. He stood up,



Tanya

409

rocking gently on the balls of his feet, his hand resting on the hilt of his

sword.

„No one is going to argue that this one is mine, are they?‟ he said softly

through clenched teeth. No one answered, although there was a low

muttering from a group of about four ruffians, and then their ringleader

stepped forward. He was a huge man with black bushy hair and beard.

„No one‟s arguing, Christian, but we want our turn too,‟ he grated, then

shifted his eyes at the blaze of anger on his chief‟s face. He towered over the

younger man, yet seemed afraid to say more.

The leader stared at him a little longer, then he smiled.

„And so you shall, Denka, so you shall – when I tire of her. When that

will be, who can say? Do you understand me?‟

Slowly the big man nodded his head, and the others followed suit.

The man called Christian‟s smile widened, then he bent down and

scooped Tanya up into his arms and jumped out through the broken door of

the coach. He looked back over his shoulder and laughed. „By the martyrs,

you should see your faces. Come, lads, as I‟ve found myself such a treasure,

you shall have the rest of the contents of the coach.‟

Instant cheering broke out as the men began to fight amongst

themselves over the contents of the various trunks. Tanya had brought some

of her jewels with her in the vague hope of perhaps ransoming Ivan and had

not bothered to hide them very carefully, as they had outriders. On their

discovery, jubilation spread through the group, and the man named Denka

carried them over to Christian.

„Seems we‟ve struck it more lucky than we figured,‟ he gloated. „Did

you mean what you said, Chief?‟



Tanya

410

Christian glanced at the glittering jewels, and his brows shot up.

„You know I always mean what I say, Denka,‟ he cried. „Just hand me

that emerald necklace there, and the rest is yours, to divide fairly amongst

the men.‟

His second-in-command passed the necklace over with a sour look,

then tied the box on to the back of his saddle. The pack horses were already

loaded up with spoils, and the men were obviously anxious to be gone in

case someone should arrive and catch them unawares. The carriage horses

had been unharnessed and led away. Denka glanced towards the coach.

„Shall we fire it, Chief?‟ he asked hopefully, but Christian shook his

head. „No, might attract too much attention,‟ he said tersely. „There are too

many of that devil‟s soldiers around for my liking. Let‟s get out of here, lads.‟

He leapt up into the saddle and indicated Tanya. „Pass up the lady,‟ he

cried and settled her lolling body on the saddle in front of him.

„The joke‟s on you, Chief, if the wench dies,‟ Denka said slyly.

Christian‟s brows drew together.

„Well, of course, if she dies, the other treasure is mine, instead,‟ he

said unpleasantly and dug his heels into the horse‟s flanks. With a curse, the

big man mounted his horse and followed, and soon the sound of the hooves

had faded away, and all the moonlight picked out were the still bodies of the

murdered men, sprawled on the ground like broken dolls.

Then from within the coach came a muffled groan and a dragging

noise. Peterkin staggered out from the wreck, then bent over and was

violently sick. Gasping, he straightened, and gingerly felt his head. His hand

came away wet with blood, and he winced in pain. As his sight cleared, he

saw the carnage all around him, then memory flooded back, and he turned



Tanya

411

quickly back to the coach, frantically pulling at the broken door. The

moonlight showed quite clearly that the interior of the coach was empty. With

dread in his heart, he stumbled round the bodies, relief flooding through him

when he saw that Tanya was not among them. Then, with a sickening turn of

his stomach, he realised that it probably would have been better if she had

been! He had no doubt of the sordid fate that awaited her, and he ground his

teeth in anguish, for he was quite helpless, stranded here in the middle of

nowhere. He had no idea in what direction the brigands had gone and could

not follow even if he had, for they had taken all the horses. Then, even as he

stood, nausea flooding over him again, he heard the thud of hooves in the

distance and stumbled over in the direction of the trees, to find cover. Within

a matter of minutes, a group of horsemen came into view, and with a feeling

of relief, Peterkin saw that they wore the red uniform of the Tsar‟s own guard.

They were already reining in their horses at the sight of the wrecked coach,

and Peterkin forced his unwilling legs to carry him out into the moonlight. He

waved his hands, shouting.

„I am Count Dostoyevskiy‟s man. I was escorting his wife to the Tsar

when we were set upon and robbed. They have taken the Countess with

them. For God‟s sake help.‟ Then under the startled gaze of the soldiers, he

crumpled into a heap on the ground.

He recovered consciousness to find himself tied on behind one of the

soldiers and groaned, dragging on the sleeve of his rescuer.

„Where are we going?‟ he asked hoarsely, trying to ignore the pain in

his head.

„To join the Tsar, of course,‟ answered the man. „We have urgent

dispatches for him. The others have ridden on ahead. When we reach



Tanya

412

Petersburg, we shall soon know if your story is true. We could find no papers

in your coach. If not . . .‟ he trailed off on a grim note. Peterkin tugged at his

sleeve again.

„But the Countess. I must find her. God knows what is happening to

her now. Don‟t you understand, I have to find her?‟

The man shook his head unresponsively.

„You‟re not going anywhere in your condition,‟ he said curtly. „The Tsar

wouldn‟t take very kindly to his personal guard gallivanting around the

countryside on wild goose chases. He‟s awaiting the dispatches, then we will

either take back more messages to Moscow or join the fighting. Personally

I‟d like to see a bit of action. I mean to be there when Narva falls. What spoils

there will be that day.‟

He lapsed into silence, obviously brooding over such possibilities, and

Peterkin, too tired and sick to answer, slipped slowly back into

unconsciousness. The rest of the journey passed like a nightmare of pain

and mental anguish, as in his lucid moments he could not help but picture

Tanya‟s fate; even as he was being carried towards safety, she was being

carried off towards some unknown destination and a fate that Peterkin dared

not dwell on.

He was barely conscious when they fi nally arrived at the farmhouse

that Peter had made into his headquarters whilst staying near Petersburg

and was vaguely aware of being laid gently on a bed and having his wounds

bathed and bandaged. He must have slept for quite a while, for when he

awoke again, he could hear loud voices coming from the other room. He

groaned and, sitting up, swung his legs off the bed and staggered into the

other room to see a huge table laid for dinner, and the Tsar seated at its



Tanya

413

head, singing lustily, and thumping with his tankard. From the uneasy looks

of his companions, Peterkin guessed that trouble was brewing, and he was

not mistaken.

It seemed that Alexis had once again disgraced his father by running

away from the fight in full view of the Tsar‟s army and officers. Peter was

now making excuses for his son, at the same time working himself up into a

terrible rage. The more he drank, the worse he became, and Peterkin stayed

in the corner, instinctively knowing that this was not the moment to draw

attention to himself. Prince Menshikov, one of the Tsar‟s closest friends, was

doing his best to distract him, but the sight of the twitching on the side of

Peter‟s face silenced him, and the onlookers knew that the Tsar was about to

go into one of his fits.

Ever since he was a child, Peter had suffered from these fits. When he

was ten years old, the Streltsy had revolted, urged on by his half-sister Sofia

in her bid for the throne. Before his very eyes, his tutor and friend Artemon

Matveyev had been brutally murdered, together with several members of the

Maryshkin family. This experience had never been forgotten, and when Peter

worked himself up into a rage, as he quite often did, he succumbed to such

fits.

Before his horrified companions‟ gaze, the Tsar crashed over and lay

stiff, his eyes rolling, blood welling out from his mouth as he bit on his

tongue. There was a dreadful silence, no one daring to move, when suddenly

a small figure appeared and slipped over to the Tsar. It was a young golden-

haired girl, barely more than a child, dressed in a very dirty shift, and little

else. With a look of scorn at their frightened faces, she pushed them away

and, taking a wooden spoon from the table, opened the Tsar‟s mouth and



Tanya

414

jammed it between his teeth, thus stopping him from biting his tongue. One

of the soldiers started forward, and another exclaimed in a shocked voice

that it was forbidden to lay hands on the Tsar, but Prince Menshikov, who

had been looking shrewdly at the girl, shook his head, and so she was

allowed to bathe the Tsar‟s face, cover him up warmly, and finally massage

his forehead.

She looked up at the men now standing around a little foolishly and

said quite calmly, „I have seen such fits before. I know just how to nurse him,

you may safely leave him in my hands.‟

Peterkin smiled inwardly at the thunderstruck expressions on their

faces but realised he would not be able to speak to the Tsar that night, so

reluctantly returned to his bed and drifted back into oblivion.

So it was that, when Peterkin awoke the next morning, it was to find the

household in a turmoil. The soldiers were packing up, getting ready to march

off to Narva, and Prince Menshikov (on the orders of Prince Romodanovsky,

head of Russia‟s secret police) had left orders for the little peasant girl to be

the Tsar‟s nurse, and to be obeyed in everything, so that the Tsar could soon

be brought back to health.

Peterkin felt stronger than he had, and he made his way into the other

room. Under the bemused eyes of some of the Tsar‟s entourage, the

strangely authoritative girl was issuing orders for Peter‟s comfort, then she

disappeared upstairs to where she had ordered him to be carried the night before.

Peterkin eyed an old woman who was bustling around clearing the table and

cleared his throat loudly. She turned startled eyes towards him, then she shook her

head in distress.



Tanya

415

„Why bless you, sir, if I hadn‟t forgotten all about you, tucked away

there in the corner,‟ she cried in dismay, „you must forgive me, but such a to -

do I never did see in all my life, that‟s God‟s own truth.‟

She then launched into a long and detailed account of the previous

night‟s happenings, ending indignantly on the orders that had been left for

the young girl to be obeyed in everything.

„I think the little baggage is some sort of servant girl in Prince

Menshikov‟s household and is now trying to worm her way into the Tsar‟s,

not that she didn‟t do a good job mind you, had everything under control in

no time.‟

As she paused for breath, Peterkin took the opportunity to speak.

‘ I must see the Tsar,‟ he cried urgently. „It is important.‟

She gave him an impatient look.

„Well, you may see him, but he won‟t see you. Haven‟t I just been

telling you he is unconscious, no one is to touch him but this Marta?‟ She

gave a sniff of disapproval.

„Well, who is in charge here then?‟ cried Peterkin. „I must speak to

someone, the lady I was escorting to the Tsar has been carried off by some

band of cut-throats, I must find her, I must!‟

The old woman shook her head.

„You won‟t be finding anyone just yet awhile,‟ she replied. „I‟ll get

some water on the fire to boil, your wound needs dressing, and I‟ll get you

some food and ask the officer who‟s in charge of the few soldiers left here to

come in, more than that I cannot do.‟



Tanya

416

Muttering under her breath, she waddled out of the room, and

Peterkin sat down at the table and put his head in his hands, fuming inwardly

at his weakness and inability to do anything to help Tanya.

What the old woman had said proved to be true. The officer refused to

have any part in a rescue attempt, saying it would be more than his life was

worth to leave here now, with the Tsar lying sick, and it was many days

before Peterkin managed to get his strength back. He was allowed to see the

Tsar a couple of times, but each time, he was sleeping.

He looked curiously at the girl bending tenderly over the huge, still

man. She was very young, her figure full, eyes dark and compassionate, her

hair a golden blonde. Nevertheless, when she looked at him from her clear,

calm eyes, he was reminded inexplicably of Tanya, and it wrung his heart.

He told her some of his story, and she was very sympathetic but could

offer no suggestions, her whole mind was on restoring the Tsar to health.

After a week had passed, the Tsar regained full consciousness at last

but was not well enough to see anyone, so in desperation, Peterkin borrowed

a horse and, although still weak, managed to ride back to the wrecked coach

in the hope of finding some clue as to Tanya‟s whereabouts, but he had to

admit it was quite hopeless.

Slowly, his heart heavy, he rode back towards Petersburg to await the

time when the Tsar would see him, but he knew deep inside that there was

nothing he could do now, it was too late anyway, and without money, with his

master missing, probably dead, he was quite helpless.

As he had guessed, when the Tsar saw him, he expressed his regrets

but would do nothing. He commanded Peterkin to stay with him until his



Tanya

417

armies were ready for the assault on Narva, as the young man was an able

secretary and was soon put to good use as Peter‟s strength returned.

So the weeks slipped by. Peterkin sent a message to Yvette, telling

her the bad news and asking her to stay with the baby until he was able to

find out what had happened to his mother and father, and he was able to join

her again. At last, the message came from Menshikov that the armies were

massing around Narva, for the Tsar had given strict orders that the assault

on the town be held back until he was able to be there. So the Tsar, with his

handful of royal guards, and Peterkin and Marta in tow set out on the journey

to Narva, to wreak his revenge for the terrible defeat he had suffered there

over three years before.

He had refused to leave the little peasant girl behind, and it was

obvious from their demeanour that the two had become lovers. The great

man could scarcely bear to let her out of his sight, and her face would soften

whenever she looked at him.

Long before they reached the town, they could hear the siege guns

booming, and the Tsar threw his head back in exultation.

„Soon, soon I shall take this accursed city, then the Swedes will wish

they had never been born.‟ He looked over his shoulder at Peterkin and

winked broadly. „And who knows, my friend? Perhaps we will find your

master, Count Dostoyevskiy within those walls. Who knows, indeed?‟

But as Peterkin strained his eyes towards the distant walls, he found it

hard to believe that he would ever see either the Count or his wife again, and

as he thought of those two , who meant so much to him, and the poor

parentless child left behind in Russia, he felt a surge of hatred towards the

times in which they lived, towards the cruelty and oppression that reigned



Tanya

418

throughout the world he knew, and wished with a strange feeling of longing

that they had all been born in some future world where they could have lived

out their lives in peace, where they could have all been together.

The siege guns boomed again, much louder now, and Peterkin shook

off the feeling that had possessed him and shaded his eyes to take in the

walls of Narva beginning to crumble slightly in places, and his pity went out

to the inhabitants cowering behind those walls. Far better, perhaps, that if

she were still alive, Tanya be where she was than behind those walls. There

were many ways to die, but for the citizens of Narva, theirs, surely, would be

one of the worst!



Tanya

419





Chapter 17


Tanya opened her eyes and looked around her with a puzzled frown. As

her vision cleared, she saw she was lying in a stone hut, sparsely and poorly

furnished, then her gaze took in the opulent furs that covered her body, and

her frown deepened. She tried to think where she was, what she was doing

here, but her mind felt strangely blank. Then, from a dark corner, a figure

stirred and stepped out into the candlelight.

It was a very old woman, her face a mass of deep wrinkles, and she

was smiling broadly, displaying toothless gums.

„Saints be praised, you are alive!‟ she screeched and rushed out,

calling loudly. She returned in a few minutes, followed by a tall man, quite

young, with one side of his face disfigured by a terrible scar. He stood on the

balls o f his feet and looked every inch the man of action. Some tiny chord

stirred in Tanya‟s mind, and she tried to sit up. He leapt forward, dropping to

his knees before the bed.

„Pray don‟t move, beautiful lady, you have had rather a nasty knock on

the head and must rest.‟

He spoke with a dialect different from her own, but she found she could

understand him quite well. He looked over his shoulder and rapped out

orders to the crone for broth and wine.

Tanya continued to regard him with mild puzzlement, her head on one

side rather like an inquisitive child. He grinned and, leaping to his feet, gave

her a quaint low bow.



Tanya

420

„Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Christian. I have no o the r,

or if I ever did, ‟tis long forgotten. Originally, I was a Swede, now I have no

nationality. I am not particular who I rob, as long as his purse is fat.‟

Her eyes wide, Tanya regarded him with interest.

„Are you a thief, then, sir?‟ she enquired.

He laughed aloud. „Yes, sweet lady, you could say I am. But for once, I

do not wish to talk of myself. I find the subject of you to be much more

interesting. Won‟t you tell me your name?‟

She opened her mouth to answer him, then shut it, panic flooding

through her. He stopped smiling and dropped to his knees again beside her.

„What‟s the matter? Don‟t say you‟re going to be difficult. I know some

fellows think the breaking in of a filly to be the best part of the sport, but

personally I disagree.‟

She looked at him without comprehension and tears welled up in her

eyes and ran down her cheeks. „ I don‟t know,‟ she wailed.

Christian frowned impatiently. „What do you mean, you don‟t know?‟

„My name,‟ she cried. „You asked me who I am, and I wanted to

answer, then I couldn‟t. I can‟t remember. I can‟t remember anything at all!‟

He dropped back on to his heels and gave a low whistle.

„Well, well! It must have been the blow on your head. I have heard of

such a thing happening. There, don‟t cry, your memory will return, you just

need time. If you can‟t give me your name, I shall give you one. You look just

like a princess to me, so that is what I shall call you – Princess.‟

She smiled mistily. „That‟s not a name, is it?‟

„It is now,‟ he cried. „Ah, good, your broth is ready. I shall give it to you

myself.‟



Tanya

421

With a curt nod of his head, he dismissed the old woman, who scuttled

out quickly. Tanya tried to sit up, then blushed as she realised she was

naked under the furs, and pulled them up under her chin. Christian laughed

again, then tenderly spooned the broth to her, and she took it like a child.

Then he gave her a large goblet of wine and ordered her to drink it all up.

She obeyed, and he refilled her glass, filling one for himself. His eyes

devoured her, taking in the tumbled, red-gold curls, the flawless face and

shoulders, and he jumped restlessly to his feet.

„I have something of yours,‟ he cried and, going into a corner of the

room, opened a large chest and took out the gleaming emerald necklace.

Her eyes widened. „That is mine?‟ she asked wonderingly. „I must be very

rich, to own such a beautiful thing.‟

„But I, too, am rich, Princess, and it shall all be yours.‟

She frowned and looked at him searchingly.

„What‟s the matter?‟ he asked sharply.

„I . . . I don‟t know. When you called me Princess like that . . . I seem to

have heard it somewhere before.‟

„So, perhaps you are in truth a princess, who knows? You shall be one

here, anyway. Here, let me put this on.‟

She leaned towards him and lifted her hair. His fingers shook a little as

he fastened the gold clasp around her neck, the perfume from her hair

wafting over him.

„Where are my clothes?‟ she enquired, still clutching the furs to her.

„I‟m afraid they got ruined, all muddy and torn they were by the time we

got here, but I have plenty here, fit for such as you.‟



Tanya

422

He darted over to the corner and began to pull gowns from the chest.

„See, are they not fit for a princess?‟

She smiled and nodded, but the frown had not left her.

„Where did you find me?‟ she asked.

„Your coach had an, er . . . accident, and your head got a bang. We

lifted you out and brought you here. Your companions, unfortunately, were

not so lucky, you were the only survivor.‟

Tanya gave a little shiver. „How dreadful. But were there no documents

– anything to show who I am, where I was going?‟

„We found none,‟ he said abruptly. „And it doesn‟t really matter, as now

you are going to stay here with me. I will look after you and make you quite

happy and comfortable. You will never want for anything, I promise you.‟

„You‟re very kind,‟ she murmured doubtfully. „But shouldn‟t I try to find

out?‟

Now it was his turn to frown. „No,‟ he said harshly. „You are mine now,

you belong to me. Do you understand?‟ He took hold of her hair, twisting it

around his fingers, and pulled her towards him, and the tears started to her

eyes. He let go at once and took her hand instead.

„I‟m sorry, don‟t cry, but you must not make me angry, I will be good to

you. You don‟t find me distasteful, do you?‟

He fingered the scar on his face, and his eyes narrowed. „Does my

face upset you?‟

She looked at him with the uncritical eye of a child and shook her head

vigorously, sending her curls tumbling around her shoulders. „Oh no,‟ she

answered. „I think you look very kind, except when you are angry. I‟m sorry I

made you angry.‟



Tanya

423

His face softened, and with one finger, he traced the line of her jaw,

down her neck, and over her shoulder. „How soft your skin is,‟ he said

huskily, then jumped resolutely to his feet. „Drink up your wine and sleep

now,‟ he ordered. „Tomorrow, when you feel stronger, we will talk again.‟

She obeyed him and lay down under the covers, closing her eyes. He

looked down at her frowningly for some time, then with a sigh, he took a pile

of furs, curled up in the corner, and was soon asleep too.

When Tanya awoke, the sun was streaming in through the small

window, and she was alone. She lay quite still, staring up at the ceiling and

vainly searching in her mind for some memory, some clue as to her identity.

Surely it was not possible to forget a whole lifetime, just like that. There must

be something – anything she could remember. But no, before the

happenings of the previous night, she could remember absolutely nothing. It

was a terrifying experience, and she found herself staring at her sof t white

hands, wondering what they had done. Had she been good or bad? Who

could tell?

She saw some clothes had been laid out at the foot of the bed, and

scrambling out from underneath the covers, she put them on. From the

experienced way her hands dealt with the complicated hooks and laces , she

knew she had worn such lovely clothes before. The dress was rather large

for her, but by lacing it tightly she achieved a reasonable result. She

wandered over to the chest, and her eyes alighted on the ornate hand mirror

that lay on top of the clothes. With trembling hands, she picked it up and

stared at the face that looked back at her from the glass. Despite the untidy

curls falling over her shoulders and the purple bruise beginning to form on



Tanya

424

her temple, it was without doubt a very lovely face, and she gazed at it

hungrily, trying to dredge up something from her mind, but to no avail.

She was still standing there when the door opened, and Christian

came in.

„Ah, Princess, you are awake. Good. Are you hungry? I‟ll get Sonja to

make us some breakfast. Did you sleep well?‟

Tanya lowered the glass and looked at him gravely.

„Yes, thank you,‟ she replied and, picking up the engraved tortoiseshell

brush that matched the mirror, began to tidy her hair. He perched on the

edge of the bed and laughed.

„Have you remembered anything yet, or are you still my mysterious

princess?‟ he asked teasingly. He did not tell her that this morning he had

gone through the boxes stolen from her coach and found out exactly who

she was! He did not want her to become the haughty Countess she would

undoubtedly have been had she not lost her memory; he wanted her as she

was, quite happy to stay with him. He had personally burnt every document

he could find, just in case.

She shook her head. „Nothing. I can remember nothing,‟ she said

plaintively.

„Well, well, never mind, perhaps it‟s just as well. Your life can begin

from now. When we have eaten, I shall show you around my village. I am the

chief here, and you are my woman, so you need fear nothing.‟

With a sigh, Tanya dropped the brush and paced restlessly up and

down whilst the old woman prepared their food. She ate with a good appetite

and, when they had finished, stepped thankfully out into the sunshine, raising



Tanya

425

her face to the sun, and stretching her arms. „How warm it is!‟ she said.

„What place is this?‟

„It is just a few huts my men have built, where we live in the summer

when the pickings are good. There is much traffic to and from Novgorod and

Nyenskans, which is good for our, er, trade. In the winter, we go to Narva,

where we are always welcome. They think we ply our trade only on the

Russians.‟

Tanya‟s head jerked up, and she looked at him sharply. „Narva. Narva,‟

she whispered. „That is where I was going. It was urgent, imperative that I

get to Narva. Why, why?‟ She struck her hands together impotently, and he

shrugged.

„Then it‟s just as well we stopped you,‟ he said, regarding her through

narrowed eyes. „The Tsar‟s forces are closing in on the town, and this time, I

do not think it will be so lucky. Heaven help them if the city falls. The Tsar‟s

Cossacks and Samoyedes will show no mercy. You are well out of it.‟

She looked at him unseeingly for a moment, then her shoulders

drooped.

„Perhaps you are right,‟ she said despondently.

Taking her hand, he showed her around his village. This did not take

long, as it consisted of only about a dozen rough stone huts, built huddled

together in a clearing, surrounded on all sides by towering trees.

„No one has ever found their way here,‟ said Christian with pride. „Nor‟,

he added, „can anyone find the way out, who does not know the proper

route.‟

Waiting to let that shaft sink home, he led her over to one of the huts

and introduced her to Denka, his second-in-command. Tanya took an



Tanya

426

instinctive dislike to the huge bearded man who looked at her in a strange

way with his hot little eyes. She drew nearer to Christian, who laughed.

„Don‟t be afraid of Denka, Princess. His growl is worse than his bite,

isn‟t that so, my friend?‟ He slapped the big man on the back, and he smiled

rather sourly. Just then, he was joined by a young woman with jet-black hair

and eyes, dressed flamboyantly in scarlet, her brown arms covered in

bracelets. She looked viciously at Tanya with narrowed eyes, her fingers

hooked into claws, as though dying to scratch at her eyes. Denka pulled her

towards him and gave her a noisy kiss, laughing and pawing at her. She

submitted, taking no notice of him at all, her eyes flickering between

Christian and Tanya. As they walked away, she could still feel the girl‟s eyes

boring into her back.

„Who was that woman?‟ asked Tanya. „Why did she look at me that

way?‟

„She is nobody – a slut,‟ replied Christian briefly and began to talk of

something else.

Most of the people in the village were rough dirty me n with loud voices

and fierce eyes, and Tanya felt afraid when she was near them. There were

also quite a few women around, most of them older than Tanya, a few, like

Sonja, were very old, and obviously only tolerated as cooks and general

slaves, it seemed to her. There were even a few ragged children running

around and playing in the dirt. They stopped and stared, eyes round with

wonder as Tanya passed by in her fine gown, her beauty only intensified by

the sordidness of her surroundings.

The day passed quietly, most of the people sleeping in the shade or

inside their houses. Tanya sat in the doorway of „her‟ hut, mostly racking her



Tanya

427

tired brain for some flash of memory, but none came. Apart from that one

word – Narva – her mind remained quite blank. Christian strode here and

there, issuing orders, and it was obvious that he was held in great awe by all

his men.

At last, the sun slipped behind the trees, and the stars came out one by

one. The night air was warm, and the villagers began to come out. Huge fires

were lit, and a pig appeared from somewhere and was soon turning on a spit

over the flames. They all sat around the fires, and wine was passed around.

Everyone seemed to drink a great deal, and Christian kept re-filling her cup

until her face was flushed and her head swimming. She felt a little better after

she had eaten but began to sag a little until she was leaning against

Christian‟s shoulder. She felt the tremor that ran through him and giggled to

herself.

Suddenly, someone began to sing. It was a beautiful voice, rich and

full, and although the language was unknown to Tanya, so poignant was the

melody that she felt tears pricking at her eyes. She saw that it was the girl

she had met with Denka, standing straight and proud by the fire, her eyes

fixed on Christian. Someone whispered behind her. „The gypsy sings well.‟

„Aye,‟ came the reply. „But she sings for the Chief. How furious she

must have been when he kicked her out to make way for this new piece!

Wouldn‟t mind taking a turn there myself, when Denka tires of her. We

should all get a turn then, eh?‟

„She‟d stick her knife into your guts, you old lecher,‟ came the reply,

and there were some ribald comments, swiftly hushed as someone realised

that Christian and Tanya could hear them. She felt him stiffen and spoke

quickly of something else, distracting his attention. So that was why the girl



Tanya

428

had looked at her with so much hate. Who could blame her? To be thrust

ignominiously out of the chief‟s house, to be taken by the huge, unkempt

Denka, must be bad enough, but to know your place has been taken by

another woman – to have to watch her with Christian must be infuriating to

say the least. Tanya gave a mental shrug and drank her wine defiantly. Her

head was swimming, but she felt warm inside, and her mind somehow

seemed less frighteningly empty when blurred by the wine. She was leaning

heavily against Christian now, and his arm was around her shoulders. She

turned her flushed face up to him and smiled, and he pulled her close,

kissing her long and hard. She kissed him back, her head thrown back on his

shoulder. The song stopped abruptly, then, with a muffled oath, he jumped to

his feet, swung her up in his arms , and without a backward glance, carried

her over to their hut. He pushed the door shut and laid his burden tenderly

down on the bed. She laughed up at him breathlessly, and with a groan, he

began to fumble with the hooks and laces on her gown. He cursed, and with

a stifled giggle, Tanya showed him how to unhook her. As he pulled her

dress and shift away, he stared down at her lovely body with a look almost of

awe in his eyes. She looked gravely back at him, and he undressed quickly,

never taking his eyes from her.

He took her with unrestrained passion, and she gave herself freely,

finding relief in the sweet waves of ecstasy that flowed through her.

After, as they lay quietly in each other‟s arms, Christian took her chin in

his hand and raised her face to his. „Who is Ivan?‟ he asked.

A sharp pain stabbed at Tanya‟s heart, then was gone. The name

lingered in the air, sounding like music to her, yet it conjured up no face, no



Tanya

429

memory. She shook her head helplessly, tears unaccountably running down

her cheeks.

„I don‟t know, I don‟t know,‟ she cried hopelessly. „Why, why do you

ask?‟

„You called out his name, when we made love,‟ he replied sullenly. „I

heard you clearly. Just that, Ivan. But you‟ll learn to cry my name like that.

That longing in your voice will be for me one day, do you hear?‟

He shook her fiercely, then crushing her to him, made love to her

again, but this time she could not respond, the feeling of abandon had gone,

dispelled by the sound of that one word. She lay submissively until at last, his

passion spent, he slept beside her. She stared up into the darkness, a

feeling of unutterable sad ness creeping over her, until at last she drifted off

into a sleep troubled by strange dreams. She was riding a horse through a

forest – nothing like this dark forest, but another, and someone was riding

behind her, calling her name, and she was laughing, urging her horse to go

faster. Her mount stumbled, and she fell with a bump, and someone was

covering her face with kisses. A much loved voice was whispering , „I love

you, I love you,‟ and she tried to see who it was, but it was too dark. She

called out „Ivan, Ivan‟, and suddenly it was light, but the face she looked up

at was Christian‟s, and disappointment flooded through her.

She woke up, shaking and crying out, and Christian took her in his

arms and comforted her, and she clung to him like a child, for the thought of

being alone was most frightening of all.

So, the next few weeks slipped by. The men would go off every few

days and return laden down with booty. Each time, Christian would give

Tanya first choice of anything he thought she might like. She chose a



Tanya

430

jewelled dagger and took to carrying it around with her – the feel of the cold

metal against her skin was comforting somehow. To the other treasures laid

before her, she showed complete indifference, exasperating Christian, who

declared he had never met another woman like her. Each night before the

raiding party was to set out, Christian would make love to her with a sort of

desperate intensity, trying to pierce the shield that seemed to surround this

woman, but he knew that although he possessed her body, he was shut out

completely from her heart, and he walked around like a man possessed.

Whenever he wasn‟t with her, he left orders with the remaining men to

ensure that Tanya did not leave the confines of the village, for he was

obsessed with the idea that one day he would return, and she would be gone.

Then one day, the raiding party returned with Denka reeling in the

saddle. He had been wounded in the shoulder, a deep flesh wound, not

serious, but enough to put him in his bed. Paca, the gypsy girl, rather

grudgingly tended his wound, not daring to do otherwise in case she should

again be passed on, this time to the men.

Christian took Tanya in his arms to kiss her, and she turned her face

away, unable to stop herself. Lately, she had been feeling more and more

depressed, on the verge of remembering something of her past, but the wall

still held. She no longer felt the childlike trust she had had in Christian – she

somehow had the feeling that she was much older than he – not in years, but

in some way difficult to define. He never used violence on her, for he was

afraid that if he did, she would withdraw from him altogether, but neither

would he allow her to refuse his lovemaking. He felt that this was the only

way to pierce her shell, and she was forced to submit.



Tanya

431

News came of a rich convoy of merchants headed their way, and the

men saddled up to ride off to their plunder, leaving Denka in charge as he

was still recuperating from his wound. The women walked to the edge of the

village to wish their men good pickings and a speedy return, and Tanya went

with them. Christian leapt into the saddle, then, looking at the pale, lovely

face beneath him, was somehow sure that he would never see it again, the

feeling more strong this time, and he bent down and lifted her up against his

side, kissing her hard. „Look out for me,‟ he murmured, then set her down

and rode away without a backward glance, closely followed by his men.

Tanya wandered disconsolately back to the village, as usual , still

racking her brains for some memory, however small, of her past. It was

almost as if she were afraid to remember, that some part of her was

stubbornly refusing to face what the past held. She had been feeling more

and more frustrated lately, still forbidden to leave the camp, and she felt

hemmed in. She would wander up and down between the huts, impervious to

the glances thrown her way, whether lustful or full of hate, depending on the

sex of the onlooker. Just now it was both, for Denka and Paca were blocking

her path, and she turned aside, heading towards the edge of the clearing

where the guards patrolled. Suddenly, right in her path, she saw a woman

sitting in the sun suckling her baby, and for a moment, an unbearable pain

struck her to the core. She stood rooted to the spot, staring at the child, then

with a low cry, like a wounded animal, she turned on her heel and darted off

towards the forest, with only one thought on her mind, to get away from the

stares of the villagers, to be quite alone. She took the guard by surprise as

she flashed past him, and he called after her, unsure whether to follow, or



Tanya

432

stay at his post. Then he saw Denka approaching and called to him, pointing

out the way she had gone.

Tanya ran on and on, until the cool quiet of the forest penetrated to

her, bringing a little peace to her tortured mind. She sank down on to a log,

panting, and buried her face in her hands. Gradually the sound of her fast-

beating heart grew quieter, and she began to feel a little better, when the

sudden cracking of a twig made her look up in fright. She stared in fascinated

horror at the man bearing down on her, and the look in his eyes gave her no

doubt of his intentions.

Too late, she sprang to her feet to flee, but Denka was already upon

her. She was knocked over brutally, and her head banged violently on the

ground. For a few seconds, darkness swept across her mind, then her

senses returned, and she found herself pinioned under the man‟s huge bulk.

She tried to struggle, and a whiff of fetid breath caught her full in the face.

Quite suddenly, she was not in the forest at all, but in a dark, rat-infested

hovel in the slums of Moscow, struggling in the darkness against an unseen

assailant. Now, as then, her fingers wrapped themselves around the hilt of

the dagger she wore in her belt, and she pulled it out and struck upwards

with all her might. Denka gave a surprised grunt, tried to rise, then slumped

heavily across her. Trembling violently, she wriggled out, and scrambled to

her feet.

„Peterkin, Peterkin, where are you, I need you?‟ she screamed, staring

wildly around. Vision returned and she shuddered, looking blindly at the trees

that surrounded her. Where was she? For a moment, time had swept her

back to Moscow, when she had been hiding with Peterkin. But from whom

had she been hiding? Ivan, of course! At the thought of his name, the



Tanya

433

floodgates opened, and the memories came pouring back, tumbling over one

another in her mind.

„Ivan,‟ she screamed the name aloud, and without even glancing at the

groaning figure at her feet, careless of whether he was alive or dead, she

turned on her heel and plunged deeper into the forest. As she ran, she

remembered the last time she had run like this – after seeing Ivan kill

Nicholas. Now, as then, she had no idea where she was running to, she had

just one thought in mind, to put as much distance between herself and the

village behind her as she could. Her breath was coming in sobs, and

eventually, she was forced to pause and rest. The shadows of evening were

already darkening the forest, and for the first time, she became aware of the

gravity of her situation.

She was quite alone and lost in the middle of wild country, most

probably miles from anywhere, without weapons and without food. Already

she could feel the pangs of hunger and cursed herself for refusing the food

the old woman had made for her that day.

Far off in the distance, a wolf howled, and another answered, and she

felt the hairs rising at the back of her neck. She had always had a strange,

unaccountable fear of wolves and found herself wondering if that was

because one day she would be torn to pieces by a pack of them. She was

even contemplating trying to find her way back to the village when she

remembered with renewed violence the reason she had been travelling to

Petersburg. She had been trying to find her husband. She had been through

so much already to that end, and if she returned to Christian, she would be a

prisoner again, for he would not risk her escape a second time. Besides, if

she had killed that beast, Denka, her reception might not be very warm,



Tanya

434

although somehow she thought that Christian would not let that bother him.

Nevertheless, she would go mad trapped there with nothing to do but satisfy

the lusts of a man she could not even like, let alone love. Why, had he not

said that there were no survivors but her, when he had „found‟ her? It was

obvious to Tanya now that his had been the hand that had caused the so -

called accident to her coach, and therefore, his was the hand that was

stained with the blood of her companions. Even as she thought this, she

remembered Peterkin, and a wave of faintness and nausea made her sink to

her knees. Had they killed him too? Had they taken the life of her loyal, brave

Peterkin, so young and full of zest for living? At the thought, a sob rose in her

throat, and soon she was weeping uncontrollably. Scrubbing her fists across

her eyes, she rose to her feet, feeling considerably calmer now. She would

go on or die in the attempt. Never would she return to those murderers.

She fixed the swiftly sinking sun to her left and began to walk for as

long as she could see. When it became too dark, and she heard again the

wolves in the distance, she climbed into the lower branches of a tree and

curled up there for safety and , feeling totally exhausted, dropped instantly off

to sleep.



Tanya

435

Chapter 18

Tanya awoke several hours later, stiff and chilly, and , for a moment, could

not think where she was. Panic swept through her, then her memory

returned, and she gave a sigh of thankfulness. Fo r a moment, she thought

she had lost her memory again!

A half moon had now risen and gave enough light to see by, so as she

was cold and hungry, she decided to move. She walked steadily for about an

hour. A couple of times, far off in the distance, she could hear what she

thought was a thrashing sound and had the uneasy feeling it was Christian

and his men searching for her, if he had returned already. Either that or the

black bears that roamed the forest. Each time, she quickened her pace,

forcing her tired legs on, away from the sound, hoping desperately that she

was not walking in circles. At last, she began to notice that the trees were

thinning out a little, and with renewed energy, she walked on. Finally, with a

gasp of relief, she realised that the forest was behind her. There was no sign

of any road, just unbroken grassland stretching off into the distance. Tired

out now, she stumbled over towards the nearest clump of bushes and ,

curling up, slept again.

When she awoke this time, the sun was quite high in the sky, and she

groaned, trying to ease her tired, aching muscles. She was now extremely

hungry and thirsty, very dirty, and decidedly weary. As she sat there,

slumped dejectedly, she became aware of a very welcome noise in the

distance. She strained her ears, then brightening visibly, set off in the

direction of the sound. Ten minutes walk brought her to the banks of a broad,



Tanya

436

tumbling river, and with a cry of sheer delight, she ran down the slope and,

falling to her knees, buried her head and shoulders in the clear, cold water.

She drank her fill and washed herself down, bathing her tired legs, then

fixing the sun to her left again, began to follow the river in what she hoped

was the direction of Petersburg. Now she had something to guide her, she

did not feel so lost and managed to still the worst of her hunger by eating

berries that grew along the banks. Setting her face resolutely to the west,

she walked on, still following the winding banks of the river. She took

frequent rests throughout the day and managed to continue until the light

failed. Tired out, she slept deeply, not stirring until the rising sun shone on

her face, waking her. Lying on her back for a moment, watching a bird swoop

across the pale blue sky, Tanya found herself wishing that she could grow

wings and fly too. She had no real idea where she was, for the exact

situation of Christian‟s camp was unknown to her. In what direction had she

been taken after the crash, and how far? As she lay there, dawn breaking

around her, a sound other than the singing of the birds gradually impinged on

her consciousness, a distant, booming sound, and she sat up, frowning,

trying to place the noise. Where had she heard that noise before? It was

synonymous with unease, and she knew that at some time the sound had

frightened her. Suddenly, realisation dawned. Once, back when she was just

a small child, the Russians had besieged a town along the border from their

farm, and the guns they had used had sounded just like this! She sprang to

her feet, straining her eyes towards the far horizon. As far as she knew, there

was only one city likely to be under attack at this time and place. Narva! At

the very thought of that name , she broke into a run, in the direction of the

distant booming. She need not go to Petersburg at all, if the attack had



Tanya

437

already begun, the Tsar would be at Narva, all she had to do was reach the

city and find him, then perhaps she could find Ivan too. Lack of food,

however, had made her weak, and she had to lapse into a stumbling walk.

For two long hours, she forced her tired legs to carry her on until

reeling with exhaustion; she reached the crown of the hill she had been

toiling up and, dropping to her knees, feasted her eyes on the sight below

her.

There, spread out beneath her like some gaudy tapestry was Narva,

surrounded by the Russian army. The Russians had built an encompassing

wall to cut off the besieged city, which lay in a sharp bend of the river that

had led Tanya here. The wall crossed the river from bank to bank to frustrate

any attempt to surprise the Russians from the rear. Behind the wall, like

some strange growth, spread the tents of the Tsar‟s army. From the drab

tents of the Kalmuck Tartars to the crude gaudy tents of the Cossacks, they

seemed to threaten the city, crouching behind its thick, grey walls. Just below

her were the tents of the main Russian Infantry, on the higher ground among

the gun emplacements. The roar from these guns was shattering, but they

had obviously been firing for some time, for one part of the city wall was

crumbling. Even as she crouched there, the deafening salvo suddenly

ceased. Before her bemused eyes, Tanya saw a column of what appeared to

be Swedish cavalrymen galloping towards the gates of the city. Miraculously,

they seemed to be unharmed by the infantry fire crackling through their

ranks. They had almost reached the gates when they were set upon by a

troop of Russian infantry. The blue and red uniforms met with a clash of

arms, yet still the Swedes broke through. Tanya felt herself holding her

breath at their sheer bravado, then the massive gates were opening to admit



Tanya

438

them. But now she felt confused, for the Swedes appeared to be turning the

tables and fighting to keep the gates open. The „dead‟ Russians were

springing to their feet and joining in the desperate, frantic struggle to hold the

gates. It had been a trick!

A mindless roar arose from the Russian ranks, as with one accord, the

yelling hordes thrust forward, and slowly the great gates yielded under the

onslaught. The slaughter was dreadful, the bodies piled high so that those

behind had to clamber over mountains of their own dead to gain access to

the city.

She crouched there, stupefied, overwhelmed by the sheer scale of the

battle raging below, and the hot sun was high in the sky when at last she saw

the blue and gold emblem of Sweden torn down and knew that the city had

fallen.

As if awakening from a spell, Tanya shuddered and eased her

cramped limbs, staring around her dazedly. Then her eyes returned to

hungrily fasten on the city below, and the thought that somewhere within

those walls, God willing, was her husband, made her set off down the hill like

a sleepwalker.

She knew instinctively that it was madness to set foot inside that

inferno, but the way she felt now, after so many tortured, weary months of

being alone, of struggling on towards the faint hope of finding Ivan again, she

could wait no longer. She hurried through the almost deserted Russian

camps, inhabited now only by the women who had followed the army and by

the wounded who had crawled or been carried back to their tents.



Tanya

439

No one took much notice of her, and had she caught a glimpse of

herself in her torn and ragged dress, her skin caked with sweat and dirt, she

would not have been surprised.

A group of camp followers were wending their way towards t he city

gates, giggling amongst themselves, lifting their skirts disdainfully as they

trod unconcernedly over the dead and dying alike. Tanya tagged on behind,

hoping to lose herself amongst them, and apart from a casual glance, they

ignored her, obviously fearing no competition from the sorry figure.

Tanya kept her eyes averted from the bodies spread everywhere, but

when she slipped in a patch of blood and fell on to a soldier who had had half

his face blown away, she screamed and retched violently, although her

empty stomach had nothing to throw back. Trembling violently, she caught

up with the women again, and at last entered the gates with them. No one

took much notice of them as they were obviously known to be Russians, no

doubt by their dress. Swedish women did not stain their teeth black or paint

their faces with beetroot juice and white paste as these women did.

Tanya was still following along behind them when a sudden surge

forward by a crowd of panicky citizens, trying to escape from their assailants

swept her away, carrying her along with them. She managed to drag herself

away and took refuge in a doorway, staring at the carnage which was taking

place all around her.

The Cossack cavalry were still galloping through the narrow cobbled

streets, burning houses to right and left, shouting their battle cry „Netchai,

Netchai! Cut! Stab!‟



Tanya

440

Hundreds of innocent, unarmed men, women, and children were being

burnt alive in their homes, or driven into churches, which were promptly set

alight.

Tanya‟s horrified eyes saw a young woman carrying a baby shot full of

arrows as she tried to escape from the conquerors; she saw another young

girl dragged along behind a galloping Cossack, screaming as her body

banged sickeningly over the cobbles. The sight took Tanya back to another

day and another time, and the gorge rose in her throat. Everywhere was

blood-lust and death. Almost swooning, Tanya cowered back against the

door, which gave way under her weight. She staggered backwards into the

room and pushed the door closed, shutting out some of the dreadful screams

and yells echoing through the streets.

The room was empty apart from the body of a man, crumpled in a heap

over the table. Where the women of the house were, Tanya could only

surmise.

That the Russians had already been through was obvious. The dead

man and the smouldering torches, which luckily had not caught, were

evidence of that. Perhaps they would leave the place alone now. At all

events, she was as safe here as anywhere for the present. It would be

madness to leave just now. Feeling like a thief, Tanya rooted through the

larder, and on finding bread, cheese , and milk, she wolfed them down, for

her stomach felt raw with hunger, and she would need all her strength for the

coming ordeal.

She stayed in her temporary refuge for about two hours, only having to

hide once, when two drunken soldiers staggered in. On seeing the body and



Tanya

441

the ransacked house, however, they lost interest and wandered off, swearing

loudly and laughing uproariously.

At last, Tanya could stand the waiting no longer. The main sounds of

fighting had faded into the distance, so she decided to take a chance and try

to find her way to the Tsar. She peered cautiously round the door, and on

seeing that the street was deserted, she slipped out and hurried towards the

sound of distant shouting. Apart from numerous bodies scattered around,

some dead, some merely in a drunken stupor, she met no one. However, as

she drew nearer to the centre of the city, she had to dodge into hiding

several times to avoid groups of soldiers, both on horseback and on foot. Her

luck held, and turning the corner, she found herself on the edge of a large

square, packed tight with people. On a balcony, shouting furiously, trying to

make himself heard, stood the Tsar. Clinging to his arm was a young, pretty

girl, and even from where she stood, Tanya could see the distress clearly on

her face. The dreadful carnage was still going on all around, the faces of the

soldiers stamped with the lust to kill. Either they had not heard their Tsar or

were deliberately ignoring him.

Suddenly, she screamed loudly as a pair of brutal hands caught her

around the waist, pulling her backwards. Fear lent her a superhuman

strength, and tearing herself free, she began to fight her way through the

melee in the square, her one thought to get to the protection of the Tsar.

Miraculously, she reached the Mansion House where she had seen Peter

unscathed, but as she reached the doorway, her luck ran out. A huge,

bearded Cossack, his tunic open revealing a blood spattered chest, lunged

towards her. Tanya screamed with pain as he grabbed a handful of her hair,

snapping her head back and pulling her off her feet. She fell with a bruising



Tanya

442

thud, and with a bellow of amusement, he grabbed the neckline of her dress

and pulled. There was a rending sound and the material gave way, ripped

from top to bottom. The ruffian licked his lips at the sight of her naked skin

and hesitated for a moment, fumbling with his trousers. Tanya took her

opportunity and rolled quickly away, scrambling to her feet. Clutching the

remnants of her shift together, she threw herself towards the doorway, only

to be brutally lifted off her feet. Tucking her under his arm like a doll, the man

drew his sword, then dropping to one knee, bent her backwards across his

legs. Half fainting from pain and fear, Tanya saw his short sword raised

above her, shining in the sunlight. Now, surely, was the time to make her

peace with God. Ironically, the only thought that flashed through her mind

was that of Ivan and a fierce anger that fate had robbed them of all the years

of happiness they should have had together.

She closed her eyes, shutting out the cruel face leering down at her,

unable even to struggle against the iron grip holding her immobile. Dimly she

heard a loud, forceful voice shouting and opened her eyes. Towering over

them, sword in hand, was Tsar Peter. He was ordering the man holding

Tanya to let her go, but the Cossack seemed not to hear and continued to

paw at her, a glazed look in his eyes. With a roar of rage, the Tsar raised his

sword, there was a swish as it flew through the air, and before Tanya‟s

horrified gaze, the Cossack‟s head, severed from his shoulders with one

mighty blow, fell on to her legs and rolled sickeningly on to the cobbles.

Blood gushed over her naked skin, and with a high animal scream , she

sprang to her feet, staring round wildly for somewhere to run. The Tsar

pushed her behind him, and she found herself face to face with the young girl

she had seen with the Tsar on the balcony.



Tanya

443

Gently, the girl put her arm around Tanya, oblivious of her gory

appearance and led her past the stupefied senior officers crowding behind

their Tsar.

„Come inside, you poor thing,‟ she said in a soft gentle voice. „You will be

quite safe here, it is the Commandant‟s house, which Peter has made into

his headquarters. Listen, that is the ceasefire sounding again. Now that Peter

has made an example of that dreadful man, the men will obey this time. It will

soon be over. Such senseless slaughter. Never, never, must it be said that

the Tsar allowed such dreadful things to happen when he is trying to bring

enlightenment to his country. He will stop it now .’

As she was speaking, the girl was leading her trembling companion up the

main staircase to the rooms above. Tanya stared at her blindly, hardly able

to believe that she was safe, back under the protection of the Tsar.

‘ Who are you?‟ she asked hoarsely, brushing her tangled, dirty hair out of

her eyes.

The girl blushed, lowering her eyes. „Oh, no one in particular,‟ she

answered in her soft attractive voice. „My name is Marta Skavronsky.‟

„Marta,‟ echoed Tanya, and no presentiment told her that she was

speaking to the future Tsarina, who was to convert to orthodoxy to become

Catherine Alexeyevna, Peter‟s second wife, later becoming the first Empress

of Russia. Generous, courageous, and abounding in good health and good

humour, she was to be an ideal wife for Peter. She would bear him twelve

children, but none of six sons, and only two girls, Anna, and the future

Empress Elizabeth would grow to maturity.

‘ Are you the Tsar‟s . . . ?‟ Tanya bit back the words, blushing at her

rudeness.



Tanya

444

Marta laughed, a sweet happy sound. ‘ Yes, I am,‟ she smiled. „And

very, very happy too .’

Tanya looked at the young girl sharply, surprise in her eyes. ‘ You love

him.‟ It was a statement, not a question.

Marta nodded, her eyes shining.

Slowly, almost painfully, a tear squeezed its way from Tanya‟s eye, and

she smiled sadly, „You are very lucky.‟

„You sound very unhappy. Here, we have arrived, these are my rooms.

I will order hot water to be brought up so you can bathe and feel more

comfortable.‟ She waved a waiting maid off to do her bidding. „We are about

the same size, although I believe you are a little taller, but nothing to signify. I

shall find you something to wear, then you will feel much better.‟

Tanya looked at Marta gratefully. „You are so kind,‟ she said

wonderingly. „Why do you do this for me, a complete stranger?‟

Marta smiled sadly. „Because I know what it is to be cold, hungry, and

frightened – all the horrors of this world I have known to the full. Until Peter

came along and lifted me up out of the dirt, my life had been nothing but

misery.‟ She looked at Tanya shrewdly. „You, I believe, are different. Oh, you

have suffered, I can see that in your eyes, but you are a lady, that stands out

a mile. Where are you from? What is your name? ’

Tanya had no option but to tell the truth. She was quite sure the Tsar

had not recognised her when he had rescued her from her attacker – indeed,

had not acted from chivalry at all, merely blind anger at not having his orders

obeyed. That he would recognise her later, when face to face, she had no

doubt. Anyway, she had come to throw herself on his mercy, to enable her to



Tanya

445

find her husband, and he had, after all, given his permission for her return to

Moscow.

„I am Tanya Dostoyevskiy,‟ she said simply.

Marta‟s eyes widened. „Why, then, you must be Count Ivan‟s wife,‟ she

said in surprise.

Tanya spun round, grasping Marta by the arm. „What do you know of

him?‟ she cried, her eyes alight with hope. „Tell me quickly, please. I have

journeyed halfway across Russia to find him, I have to find him! ‟

Marta hugged her, her eyes warm with pity.

„Oh, you poor thing, no wonder you look so unhappy. No, no, I have

heard nothing, don‟t look so frightened. It‟s just that I have heard the Tsar

speak of him so many times. I believe he said that he had questioned Count

Horn, the enemy Commandant about him. When you have tidied yourself,

perhaps you can see Peter, and he will tell you what he has found out. Look,

here is your water now. We will fill the bath before the fire. See, I have some

scented bath oil, it is beautiful. I bathe every day now, you know. When you

have never had a hot bath in your life, it is a luxury you cannot bear to

forego.‟

Tanya stripped off the remnants of her clothing and stepped into the

hot scented water, sinking into it with her usual feeling of delight.

„I know just what you mean,‟ she said, her spirits rising unaccountably.

So Peter had been asking questions about Ivan! What had been the

answers? Almost, she was afraid to find out. She had travelled so far,

struggling against so many obstacles, to be told now that he was dead would

surely be the end of her. But he could not be dead! If it were so, her heart

would cease to beat too!



Tanya

446

Suddenly impatient, she sprang out of the tub, accepting the warm, soft

towel handed to her by the servant. Tanya had asked Marta to find her a

plain gown and was soon dressed in a severe, high-necked gown of deep

burgundy, which became her admirably. Whilst she dried her hair, she

answered Marta‟s eager questions about Moscow, the fashions, and all the

details interesting a young girl of seventeen, trying to instil some enthusiasm

into her voice. Marta‟s eyes widened when she heard how many Russian

ladies of fashion blackened their teeth and stained their cheeks and lips with

beetroot, having first plastered their faces with a thick, white paste. Both girls

agreed the result was ludicrous, to say the least, and were soon chatting

away, each pleased with the other.

Tanya had just finished braiding up her hair, when the door burst open,

and the Tsar strode in, immediately dwarfing the small room, bringing in the

rude, masculine world that for a few moments had been banished.

He stopped on the threshold, eyes narrowing a little as recognition

dawned. For a moment he stood, his frowning gaze fixed on Tanya‟s face.

The two women exchanged apprehensive glances. As Peter‟s eyes moved to

Marta‟s face and saw the urgent appeal in her eyes, he suddenly gave a roar

and slapped his thigh, the noise sounding like a pistol shot in the small room.

„Would you believe it?‟ he cried. „So the lovely Tanya turns up again. I

would never have recognised you outside, but it seems I did you a service,

hmm?‟

Tanya, who had sprung to her feet on his entry, sank into a deep

curtsey.

‘ Indeed, I owe Your Majesty my life without a doubt,‟ she murmured. „I

am most grateful.‟



Tanya

447

The Tsar laughed and bounded across the room to Marta, and

snatching her up in his arms, tossed her in the air like a doll.

‘ And my Krasavitsa has been making you comfortable, I see.‟

Tanya was bursting with impatience, interested only in finding out about

Ivan, but she knew better than to rush her fences with the Tsar, so stood

quietly waiting. Her eyes widened a little in astonishment as she looked at

Peter, still holding Marta in his arms and smiling down at her. She would

hardly have recognised him, so softened had his rather harsh features

become. Of the persistent tic that pulled at the side of his face there was no

sign, and the thought crossed Tanya‟s mind that the young girl could be very

good for the Tsar – and consequently, for Russia.

At last, Peter set Marta on her feet and swung round towards Tanya, a

speculative look on his face.

„So, what brings the lovely Countess Dostoyevskiy to Narva?‟ he asked

abruptly. „And in such circumstances, may I add!‟

„Surely, Your Majesty must know the answer to that question,‟ she

cried. „Forgive me for speaking plainly, but I cannot help but see that you and

Marta are very much in love. You both know the feeling, and it is just that that

has brought me halfway across Russia to find my husband.‟ Her voice broke,

the tears suddenly coursing down her cheeks, as tiredness swept over her.

„Oh, Your Majesty, have you heard anything of him? Have you any news at

all?‟ Peter hesitated for a moment, then saw Marta‟s face, full of pity.

‘ Come and sit down,‟ he said in a much kinder voice. „I have been

making enquiries about Ivan, for not only is he a loyal subject, but he is also

my friend. I pumped the Commandant here, but can get nothing out of him. I

believe him to have been thrown into prison many months ago, and no doubt



Tanya

448

forgotten. I do not believe he was executed, for everyone here denies i t.

What has become of him since, I do not know. I must be frank with you, the

state of most prisons is very grim – I would not hold out too much hope – in

fact, I can offer you very little hope at all!‟



Tanya

449





Chapter 19


Blankly, Tanya stared up at the Tsar, her mind refusing to register what

he had said. She passed a shaky hand across her eyes and spoke in a

pathetic little voice. „Would Your Majesty be kind enough to excuse me? I . . .

I feel so tired and confused.‟

Peter nodded, and Marta sprang up, shepherding Tanya from the room.

She kissed her impulsively on the cheek, tears of sympathy in her eyes. „Do

not despair, you must never give up hope, believe me.‟ On these words, she

delivered Tanya into the care of a servant and, with a spring in her step,

returned to her lover.

Tanya followed the servant up several flights of stairs and was shown

the room where she was to sleep. Although she had pleaded tiredness –

indeed, she felt weary to the core, she found she could not even lie down.

She paced backwards and forwards across the floor, wringing her hands,

fear gnawing at her stomach.

Even hearing from the Tsar‟s own lips the apparent hopelessness of

her ever finding Ivan again, she still could not believe that she would never

again see the tall figure of her husband, vibrant with life, his eyes alight with

love for her. Even thinking of him was like a knife twisting inside her, and

impulsively she flung wide the windows, stepping out on to the tiny balcony

that faced out on to the square.

Although sporadic fighti ng was still going on in the distance, the

immediate vicinity was now quiet. The sun was setting, throwing deep

shadows across the cobbles, its lurid light giving the twisted bodies still lying

in the square a macabre life. How long she stood gazing over the rooftops



Tanya

450

she had no idea, but eventually, her attention was caught by a dull roaring in

the distance. Rather apathetically she wondered what it could be, then,

rubbing her tired eyes, was just about to go back into the room when the

distant shouting began to penetrate her mind. Stiffening, she was suddenly

alert, straining her ears. The shouting was much nearer now, and a figure

burst out of a side alley, screaming. It was a young girl, her face distorted

with fear. Pursuing her closely were three men, b ut it was their appearance

that riveted Tanya‟s gaze. They were all absolutely filthy, their faces bearded

and unkempt, their clothes in rags, but it was the chains swinging from their

wrists upon which her eyes were fixed. The shouting merged into one terrified cry.

„They have opened the prisons. God help us all, they have freed the

prisoners.‟

Tanya froze, unable to move for a moment. Hope and fear fought

inside her, and inevitably, hope won. Turning on her heel, she ran back into

the room, and snatching a large woollen shawl that lay across the clothes

chest, threw it over her head and shoulders. Cautiously she opened the door

and peered round. The hallway was empty. With a sigh of relief, she slipped

silently along until she found what she was looking for. A narrow, dark

stairway led downwards from the servant‟s quarters. She flew down it, her

feet hardly seeming to touch the ground, her weariness forgotten, and found

a small side door, which opened easily enough when she unbolted it. There

was no sign of any guards – perhaps the warning of the prisoners‟ escape

had caused them to move.

Without a backward glance, Tanya ran across the square and dived

down the road from which she had seen the first prisoners emerging. For a

moment, she thought it was empty, then a dull roar came to her ears, and



Tanya

451

she saw a solid mass of humanity bearing down on her, struggling,

screaming, and fighting. With a gasp of fear, she flattened herself against an

alcoved doorway as the human tide swept past her. Somehow she managed

to keep her feet, and the mob scarcely seemed to notice her there as it

mindlessly surged by. She shrank back into the doorway, glad of the

gathering shadows, for she had no illusions as to her fate should one of the

convicts‟ roving eyes fall on her. Many now clutched bottles of wine and were

pouring the contents down their throats as if they would never stop; others

were already dragging terrified women along, obviously looking for

somewhere away from the mob.

However, her luck held, and the main body swept past her without a

glance, until the roaring faded into the distance. Tanya had a feeling of anti -

climax, wondering what she was doing here, what she had hoped to

accomplish by rushing out the way she had. She stood uncertainly, peering

into the gloom. Many bodies lay strewn about the street, some groaning,

others lying still, never to move again.

She detached herself from the shadows and walked slowly into the

centre of the road, still illuminated by the last rays of the setting sun.

Suddenly, no more than a few feet from her, one of the bodies moved and

staggered up, swaying on his feet. Unable to resist a scream, Tanya turned

on her heel, poised for flight. Even as she started to run, a quiet voice behind

her spoke, weak and full of a wry bitterness that wrung at the heart. „Please

don‟t be afraid. I‟m sorry I startled you, whoever you are. I assure you I am

quite harmless.‟

Tanya froze, and for a moment, it seemed to her that her heart had

stopped beating. Slowly, slowly she turned, hardly daring to look at the tall,



Tanya

452

emaciated figure standing uncertainly before her. Her tongue was cloven to

the roof of her mouth, and her heart seemed to be leaping out of her breast.

She took a hesitant step nearer, and the dying sun lit up the face before her.

She felt faintness sweep over her, then joy was coursing through her veins

like wine, and the tears began to pour unheeded down her cheeks. At last, at

last, fate had taken pity on them, had reunited them in this unexpected way.

She had found him! All the hardships, misery, and suffering she had endured

over the past months were forgotten, as if they had never been. They were

together again, she had found him!

Forcing her legs to move, Tanya walked right up to him, and raising her

face to his, kissed him tenderly on the lips, oblivious of the beard straggling

around his chin, of the dirt and blood encrusted over his filthy rags. Ivan

jumped as if he had been stung, and backed away, holding his hands out

before him. „Why . . . why did you do that?‟ he cried hoarsely. „Who are you?‟

Shocked, Tanya stared at him. Surely he had not forgotten her? No,

no, of course, that was impossible. He just had not recognised her – she was

the last person he would be expecting to see in this place. She threw back

her shawl and stepped forward. For the first time she spoke. „Have I changed

that much, my dear love?‟ she said quietly, her eyes devouring the tired

features of the man she had travelled so far to find.

For a moment he did not move, staring unseeingly above her head,

then he took another step away from her, shaking his head. „What are you

trying to do to me?‟ he cried in a loud, anguished voice. „Have I not suffered

enough, that you must taunt me like this? Oh God, if it could only be true.

Tanya, Tanya.‟



Tanya

453

Even as his fevered voice called her name, Ivan‟s legs gave way, and

he pitched forward. Tanya half caught him as he fell and pillowed his head in

her lap, sobbing. „Oh Ivan, Ivan, what have those devils done to you, my

love, my love.‟

She was still kneeling there, sobbing, when Peterkin found her. He had

been working in his study on some of the Tsar‟s papers when Peter,

suddenly remembering him, had sent for him. He had been informed that the

Countess Dostoyevskiy had turned up here, tired but safe, and was at the

moment resting. Hardly able to believe his ears, filled with jubilation and

relief, he had stammered his thanks and rushed off to enquire which room

the Countess had been allocated. She had no idea that he was here, the

Tsar having forgotten his existence when he spoke to her, and resting or not,

Peterkin knew that Tanya would be overjoyed to find that he was safe, for

she must believe he had died in the coach when it was attacked.

Finding his way to her room, he knocked on the door. There was no

answer, and when he had knocked several times, he had cautiously opened

the door, expecting to find Tanya fast asleep on the bed. On finding the room

empty, he felt distinctly uneasy and made enquiries all around the house but

to no avail. No one had seen Tanya; everyone had thought she was asleep

in her room. Really worried now, Peterkin had been standing undecided in

the great entrance hall, when he had heard the news going around that the

prisoners had been released. Immediately he was sure he understood. If he

knew Tanya – and surely he knew her as well as anyone – the minute she

had heard that the prisoners were free, she had rushed off in her usual,

impulsive manner with wild plans of finding Ivan. Peterkin knew quite well

that the chances of her doing so were practically nil, but that would not weigh



Tanya

454

with Tanya. And now, God knows what had happened to her. Pausing only to

strap on his sword, he called two soldiers lounging around outside to come

with him, then set out to look for her. It was not difficult finding the way the

prisoners had come, one had only to follow the bodies. A couple of times a

woman‟s body was passed, crumpled up in a pathetic heap, and each time,

Peterkin‟s heart leapt into his mouth until he saw it was not Tanya.

When they turned the corner, and he heard a woman sobbing, he

beckoned the soldiers and hurried forward. Darkness had fallen, and he

could not see clearly, but with a feeling of unutterable relief, he recognised

the pale face turned up to him as Tanya‟s.

He dropped to his knees beside her. „Thank God, I have found you.

Whatever possessed you to come out here, just as you had reached safety?‟

he scolded.

A small voice answered him unbelievingly.

„Peterkin?‟ said Tanya incredulously. „Peterkin? Is that really you? I

thought you were dead. I don‟t understand anything any more, all I know is, I

have found Ivan. He‟s here, look, Peterkin. I don‟t know if he‟s alive or dead.

He must be delirious, because he didn‟t recognise me at all. Oh, Peterkin,

help me get him back to safety, I mustn‟t lose him again now, not now I have

found him at last. Help me, Peterkin.‟

From her voice, Peterkin realised that she was very near breaking

point. Probably it was she that was delirious, for how could she possibly have

found Ivan amongst all the teeming masses that had burst out of the prisons.

Prising her loose gently, he knelt down beside the still figure, cursing himself

for not bringing a torch. It was so dark now in this narrow street, he could see



Tanya

455

nothing. He ordered the two soldiers to pick up the body, and they walked

back towards the square, and the Tsar‟s headquarters.

„It‟s best to humour her anyway,‟ he thought, as he looked anxiously at

the tired figure stumbling along beside him. She has obviously been through

a tremendous ordeal herself – he knew how she had arrived at the

headquarters, and how the Tsar had saved her life. She had been through

more than any woman should have to bear; now she must be nursed back to

health.

He got his charges inside without further incident and had the soldiers

carry the inert body up to Tanya‟s room, as she showed signs of succumbing

to hysteria when he tried to talk her out of the idea. It wasn‟t until the

unconscious man was laid on the bed that he looked at him again, for his

thoughts had been too taken up with Tanya. He had thought her little

changed, although still far too thin, and sadder too, somehow. Now,

however, he walked over to the man on the bed and looked hard at him.

Despite the unkempt beard and the dirt, it was undoubtedly the face of Ivan

Dostoyevskiy! He turned unbelievingly to Tanya.

„It‟s really him,‟ he said in an awed voice. „You really found him. How

did you do it?‟

‘ Of course it‟s him, you fool,‟ snapped Tanya. „Do you think I don‟t

know my own husband?‟ Then her face softened, and she ran up and

hugged him impulsively.

„Oh, I‟m sorry, Peterkin, what a shrew you must think me. I haven‟t

even said how glad I am to see you, but I am, you know that, don‟t you? I

thought you were dead too. It was really a chance in a million, finding him

like that – in a way he found me. He just stood up before me when the mob



Tanya

456

had passed. I couldn‟t believe it myself. I think for the first time in my life, the

fates were for me instead of against me. But, Peterkin, he . . . he isn‟t dead,

is he? I don‟t think I could bear it.‟

Peterkin turned quickly to the injured man.

„No, no, Tanya, I can see him breathing, and his heart is beating too,

quite strongly. He has a wound here, in his side, that‟s where the blood must

have come from, but it‟s only a flesh wound. He has a very strong

constitution, he must have to have survived for months in prison, he‟ll come

through, never fear. We must send for Peter‟s physician, get hot water, and

bandages organised.‟

„Yes, yes, of course, what am I thinking of? And the Tsar must be

informed that he has been found.‟

The next few hours were trying ones for Tanya, despite the physician‟s

assurances that her husband had no fatal injuries but was merely exhausted

through lack of food and the loss of blood from the wound. When he was

bathed and bandaged, they tucked him up in Tanya‟s bed, and she had a

small cot put up by the fire for herself to sleep in, for she refused to be parted

from him. They managed to get a few drops of wine between Ivan‟s lips, but

the doctor insisted that at the moment, sleep was the best cure. One by one,

the well-wishers trickled away . Marta came to see Tanya and hugged her, so

pleased that she had found her husband, and the Tsar himself looked in for a

moment and said he would be back in the morning, when hopefully Ivan

would be awake.

At last, there was just the three of them left, and Peterkin stood up and

stretched wearily.



Tanya

457

„I wish you would let me stay and look after Ivan,‟ he scolded. „You are

tired out yourself and need a good night‟s sleep.‟

„Thank you for offering, my dear friend,‟ smiled Tanya. „Perhaps you

would like to sleep in the little closet next door, then you can pop in and

check on us if you feel worried. I couldn‟t leave him now, I feel as though if I

leave this room, when I come back in, it will all have been a dream, and he

won‟t be here at all.‟

Peterkin laughed and nodded. „Yes, that‟s a good idea. I‟ll say

goodnight then, Tanya, and for the first time for a long time, I‟ll go to sleep

with an easy mind.‟

He disappeared through the door, and Tanya undressed slowly, never

taking her eyes from the still figure on the bed. She could still hardly believe

that it was really Ivan lying there, that this was not some beautiful dream

from which she would awaken to find herself back in that dreadful prison of

Father Stevanov‟s, or back with the bandits in the forest. Slipping into her

wrap, she pulled a chair up to the bed. Ivan was looking a little feverish,

tossing his head on the pillow, his thin hands clenching and unclenching on

the coverlet. Tanya took one and held it between her own, tenderness

welling up inside her, and it seemed to calm him. Once she thought she

heard him whisper her name, and she kissed his hot forehead, murmuring , „I

am here, my love, I‟ll never leave you again, never.‟ He sank into a deep

slumber, and Tanya sat by his side, still holding his hand.

When Peterkin came to check on them a couple of hours later, she

was still there, holding his hand, although she had slipped slightly in her

chair, and was fast asleep. He managed to lift her on to her bed without



Tanya

458

waking her and covered her over. He felt Ivan‟s forehead and was relieved to

find it quite cool.

He checked on them several times during the night and sat with them

as morning drew into afternoon and still they both slept. Instinctively he knew

that this was nature‟s way of healing and was the best medicine either of

them could have.

He was sitting by the window, writing, when the man on the bed stirred

and opened his eyes. Tanya was still sleeping peacefully, which was not

surprising considering all the walking she had done to get to Narva, and what

she had been through. Peterkin rose at once and hurried over to the bed.

„Ivan, can you hear me?‟ he whispered. „You‟re safe now, back in the

Tsar‟s headquarters. It‟s all over now, you‟re among friends again.‟

Ivan‟s head turned on the pillow, and he stared up at Peterkin. „How

did I get here?‟ he asked in a puzzled voice. „Is the Tsar here?‟

„Yes,‟ answered Peterkin, smiling. „Narva has fallen and is now in the

Tsar‟s hands. We all thought you were dead except Tanya, she wouldn‟t

believe it.‟

„Is that you, Peterkin?‟ asked Ivan and reached out a groping hand. „I

know your voice. It is you, isn‟t it?‟

The smile faded from Peterkin‟s face, and he felt a cold hand close

around his heart. He leaned over Ivan, a sense of foreboding creeping

through him. „Of course, it‟s me,‟ he whispered. „Can‟t you see me?‟

Even as he asked the question, he somehow knew the answer. Ivan

shook his head. „No, I can‟t,‟ he said harshly. „I‟m quite blind. Didn‟t you

know? You have only got half of me back. My sight I left in that stinking

dungeon they flung me into.‟ He laughed, a mirthless sound that made



Tanya

459

Peterkin flinch. „Do you know, I didn‟t even know I was blind until someone

came and unlocked my door and told me the prisons were open, we were all

free. I had been in the dark so long, my eyes just didn‟t function any more. I

thought the whole prison was in darkness until I got outside and felt the sun

on my face.‟

Peterkin stared down at the bitter face of the Count, and something

within him rebelled against the injustice of it all.

„I . . . I don‟t know what to say, Ivan,‟ he began. „But it may not be

permanent. The Tsar will get the best physicians in the land to look at you –

your sight may yet return.‟

Ivan shook his head. „Perhaps, but meanwhile, what do I do? I can‟t

spend the rest of my life a helpless hulk, dependent on others. I should

rather be dead.‟

„No!‟ The word was flat and final, and both men turned their heads as

Tanya sat up on the cot. She had awakened at the sound of voices and had

heard the last part of their conversation. She looked pale, but quite

determined. „Don‟t ever say you would rather be dead than dependent on

me, Ivan.‟

„Tanya!‟ He struggled to sit up in bed, his whole face lighting up at the sound

of her voice. „So it was you, last night. I thought I had dreamed the whole

thing, I couldn‟t see how it could possibly be you. What are you doing here?‟

„I came to look for you,‟ she said simply and ran over to the bed,

flinging herself into his arms. Peterkin tiptoed out of the room, although both

of them had, for the moment, forgotten his existence.

Cupping his face in her hands, Tanya stared hungrily down at him,

then bending her head, she kissed him long and lingeringly on the mouth.



Tanya

460

For a moment, he tried to resist, then with a groan, his arms went around

her, and he crushed her to him with a strength he hadn‟t known he stil had.

Tanya felt as though she were consumed with fire and strained herself to

him, murmuring his name between kisses. His passion began to mount, and

with a shaky laugh, she pulled herself away from him, trying to calm the

pounding of her own heart.

„What am I doing?‟ she gasped. „You are ill, you have been wounded,

and you must eat, sleep, and get well for me. I mustn‟t exhaust you like this.‟

He still had hold of her wrist, and he pulled her back towards him, his

fingers finding her face. Gently he traced the pure line of her features, then

he pulled her down to him and kissed her gently. Holding both her hands, he

sank back on to the pil ow with a grimace. „By God, I‟m as weak as a kitten,‟

he complained. „So, Tanya, you heard what I said. I‟m blind – helpless. You

can‟t want to be saddled with me as I am.‟

Tanya laughed, a clear, joyous sound that brought a look of wonder

into his face. „You don‟t think I have struggled across half of Muscovy,

suffered so much, all in the hope of finding you, to just give you up over such

a trifle, do you?‟ she said lightly.

„A trifle?‟ he repeated harshly. „Do you realise what it wil mean?

Tanya, I can‟t ask it of you, you deserve better.‟

She squeezed his hand fiercely. „There is no one better for me than

you, were I to search the world for the rest of my life. You shall not get rid of

me so easily. Besides, one day I know your sight wil return, and you‟l be

able to look at me when I tell you I love you, as I shall every day for as long

as we live.‟



Tanya

461

He pulled her towards him again, cradling her against his heart, his

hand stroking her hair. „Then I don‟t believe there is another man in the world

as lucky as I. Oh, Tanya, Tanya, I have thought of nothing else but you the

whole time I was in that stinking prison, worrying about you. Did you come

here with Peterkin and the Tsar? He should never have allowed it, you might

have been in danger.‟

She laughed a little shakily. „No, my sweet, I came alone. In fact, I

nearly didn‟t get here at all. I am going to order you food and drink, then

perhaps if you feel strong enough later, I shall tell you all that has happened

to me since I saw you last. And you, you must tell me. I thought I had

suffered, but I believe it must have been far worse for you, shut up alone in

the darkness.‟

When he had bathed and eaten and drunk his fill, Ivan told her of his

adventures, how he had gained access to Narva and had managed to send

out all sorts of valuable reports to the Tsar before he was captured. Why he

had not been executed he was not sure, although he wondered whether he

might not have been offered as hostage or for ransom at some time. He had

been thrown into a deep, pitch-black hole, where the floor was sometimes

flooded when the river was high. The only thing that had kept him alive all

those months had been the thought of her and the fierce desire to hold her in

his arms again.

Exhausted now, he slept, and when he awoke again, seemed much

stronger, and demanded to hear Tanya‟s story. She was just about to begin

when the door burst open, and the Tsar strode in. Without ceremony, he

crossed to the bed and grasped Ivan‟s hand, shaking it wordlessly, tears

standing out in his eyes. Tanya was moved to see him so upset for Ivan, and



Tanya

462

curtseying low, she crossed over to the fire, leaving the two men together.

The Tsar stayed for about half an hour, talking of the battle and the war in

general. He showed great tact, which surprised Tanya greatly, and it was

with genuine warmth that she returned the handclasp he gave her as he left.

„Tanya, Tanya.‟ Ivan‟s voice brought her back into the room, to his

side.

„Yes, my love?‟ she asked softly.

„I thought you had gone. Stay here by me, I want to hear your story.‟

Then, before she could begin, he asked abruptly, „Tanya, do you really

think there is a chance my sight may return?‟

„Of course, there is a chance. The Tsar‟s physician is coming to see

you soon, when he has finished with the wounded. I am sure he will say the

same. Besides . . . ,‟ her voice faltered a little , „you have to get your sight

back, for there is someone I particularly desire you to see.‟

„Who is it?‟ he asked, looking puzzled.

„His name is Nicholas,‟ she said softly, her eyes fixed on his face. „And

I love him very, very much.‟

„What do you mean? What are you saying?‟ Anger was vibrant in his

voice. „Are you making fun of me? By God, if you are . . .‟

„No, no, Ivan, let me finish. He is just six months old. He‟s your son,

Ivan – our son!‟

For a moment he didn‟t answer, and half afraid, Tanya took him by the

shoulders and shook him. „Did you hear me?‟ she cried. „That‟s what you

have to fight for, my love. Our son.‟

„But . . . how is this possible? I don‟t understand.‟ Suspicion and

bewilderment chased each other across his face.



Tanya

463

„I knew even before we were married,‟ she said quietly. „Yvette knew

too, but I swore her to secrecy. I didn‟t want you to ask me to marry you just

because of the child, don‟t you understand? I wanted you to marry me for

myself, because you thought I would make you a worthy wife, because you

loved me, I don‟t know. Then, when you asked me to marry you, I was so

happy, but you were leaving to make your peace with the Tsar, and I k new if

I told you I was pregnant, you would never have gone, and I would never

forgive myself for stopping you, you might even have come to blame me for

being the cause of your never being able to return to Russia again, and I

would rather have died than have that happen, so.‟ She shrugged her

shoulders fatalistically. „Now I think perhaps it would have been better if I had

told you. We might now be living in comfort in France, and my son would

have been born in luxury instead of on a filthy straw pallet, i n freezing

conditions. It almost cost my son his life too, that decision. As for me, I am

lucky to be here talking to you at all.‟

She felt a little angry and hurt, for she had seen the suspicion on his

face, but when she looked back at him, his face was alight with such as

expression of joy that she drew a sharp breath. „My son. I have a son!‟ he

repeated in an unbelieving voice, then with a whoop, pulled her into his arms.

This time, no resistance would hold him back, and in spite of her half-hearted

protests, he took her again to that place where only he knew how to lead her,

making love with a fierce demanding passion that left her breathless and

ecstatic.

They were lying locked in one another‟s arms, whispering

endearments, when there was a light tap on the door. Tanya leapt up hastily,

rearranging her disordered garments and was trying to tidy her hair, which



Tanya

464

was half way down her back when the door opened , and Peterkin peered

round. His glance took in the rumpled bed, and Tanya‟s blushing face, and

he grinned. „I won‟t ask if I‟m disturbing you, because it‟s obvious I am. Shall

I go to the devil?‟

„No, no, Peterkin, come in,‟ cried Tanya, trying to cool her hot cheeks.

„We . . . I, that is, I‟m just going to order some food for Ivan.‟

She rushed from the room, and Ivan laughed, a joyous sound that

made Peterkin stare at him in surprise.

„Have you seen him, Peterkin? My son? Have you seen him?‟

„Yes, sir, I have. My wife, Yvette, is looking after him now, at your

estates. He‟s a fine lad, just fine.‟

The Count‟s eyebrows went up. „Your wife, eh? So you married the

little French lady? Congratulations. You must be missing her. We must go

home. I shall speak to the Tsar and get his permission for us all to go home.

That, at the moment, is all I want. That – and my sight.‟

At that moment, Tanya returned.

„Oh yes, Ivan, please let us go home. I am so tired of wandering about,

searching and struggling. All I want now is to be with you – you and Nicholas.

We will be so happy, won‟t we, Ivan?‟

There was an urgent question in her voice that made Peterkin look at

her in surprise. Ivan smiled and held out his hand. „ Yes, we will be happy,‟ he

answered softly. „ I think we have earned a little happiness, don‟t you? I want

to know everything that has happened since I last saw you, every little detail.

No, no, stay, Peterkin, you are as involved as anyone.‟

So, in the peace and quiet of the bedroom, in the flickering firelight,

Tanya re-lived all the terrors and privations of the past months. Soon she



Tanya

465

forgot the other occupants of the room, forgot even that she was talking to

Ivan. Her voice showed again the terror she had known whilst in the clutches

of Father Stevanov – the joy when she had found her son alive, and lastly,

the aching loneliness she had known after she had escaped from the

brigands and began to walk to Narva, to find Ivan.

Dawn was creeping in the window when she finished speaking, and her

audience, who had been sitting spellbound, shook themselves and seemed

to waken as if from a dream. Without a word, Ivan drew her into his arms,

and almost immediately, she fell asleep, like a child, her head pillowed on his

chest.

Peterkin left them there, together, as they were meant to be.



Tanya

466





Chapter 20


Tanya opened the window and breathed in the fresh country air. She

could hear the servants bustling about below and knew it must be time for

Nicholas to be up and about. She looked towards the bed where Ivan was

still sleeping, and as always, her heart swelled with love.

They had been together here at the Dostoyevskiy estates, just outside

Moscow for three months now. The peace and quiet, the constant

companionship with her husband had been perfect bliss for Tanya, but she

knew that Ivan was getting impatient, with himself mostly, for being unable to

master being blind. Oh, he tried, he tried so hard. He could find his way

about alone now, with the aid of a stick and could manage quite a lot of

things without help, being almost fiercely independent. He had been told by

the Tsar‟s physician that his blindness was not uncommon amongst

prisoners who had been left in darkness and starved for long periods of time.

Some got their sight back, some did not. Only time would tell.

He had attacked his problems with his customary vigour, and Tanya‟s

heart had gone out to him when she saw how hard he tried to hide from her

that he was not happy, but she knew him too well. He had always been such

an active man, leading a full and adventurous life, masterful and full of self -

confidence. It must be purgatory for such a man, living helplessly, dependent

on others for so much. The last two weeks he had taken to going out for long

walks alone, and although she worried until he returned, she refused to let

anyone go with him unless he asked for company. He still had so much

pride; she knew he must be suffering so much.



Tanya

467

With a sigh, Tanya slipped along the corridor to the nursery. Nicholas

was there, bouncing up and down in his cot, kicking his chubby little legs,

and smiling at her. He was crawling now, a strong, healthy child who showed

no sign of the terrible circumstances of his birth. He looked so much like Ivan

that her heart turned over in her breast every time she looked at him. He had

her hair, the tawny curls clustered on top of his head, but Ivan‟s grey eyes

looked imperiously out at the world, and he was definitely his father‟s child.

He was a happy baby, always laughing and affectionate. The whole

household worshipped him, and spoiled him dreadfully.

Tanya lifted him out of his cot and played with him for a while until his

nurse came to give him his breakfast; then she handed him over and

returned to her room. Ivan was awake now and smiled at her as she entered,

humming under her breath.

„Hello, my sweet. Have you brought Nicholas in to say good morning?‟

„No, he‟s having his breakfast,‟ answered Tanya, giving him a kiss. „I

thought you might still be asleep.‟

„No, no.‟ He forced some cheerfulness into his voice. „What have we

got planned for today?‟

„I know Peterkin wishes to see you about a lot of dreary old business,‟

said Tanya with a laugh. „Otherwise, the day is ours.‟

„Yes, the day is ours.‟ He sighed and held out his arms. „Come here.‟

She went gladly, and another hour passed before they went downstairs

for breakfast. Ivan disappeared with Peterkin into the study, and Tanya spent

some time in the nursery with Nicholas. When she went downstairs at

midday, she found Peterkin coming to look for her.



Tanya

468

„Ivan has gone out,‟ he told her worriedly. „He seems depressed this

morning and suddenly said he was going for a walk. I thought I had better tell

you.‟

Tanya nodded. It was the first time he had gone out without telling her,

and she felt a little hurt but pushed the feeling away, not wanting to be too

possessive. She busied herself about the house, but when two hours had

passed, she could bear it no longer and had her horse saddled.

She rode out in the direction he usually walked, her eyes straining for

sight of him. It was a beautiful autumn day, but the bright sunshine seemed

to mock her somehow. She rode around for an hour, but there was still no

sign of Ivan. Beginning to feel really worried now she returned to the house,

hoping he would already be there, but when she arrived, he had not been

seen.

She shook her head at Peterkin‟s and Yvette‟s insistence that a search

party should set out, for she knew instinctively how Ivan would hate it if he

should be found and brought back like an erring child. She rode off again in

the opposite direction to that which she had taken before. She was only

about five minutes ride from the house when she saw a figure in the

distance. She recognised Ivan with a surge of relief and quickly dismounted

from her horse, tying it to a tree. She began to walk towards him, then saw

with concern that he was filthy and had lost his stick. Obviously he had been

wandering about quite lost. She cursed herself and quickened her pace, then

stopped suddenly, unable to believe her eyes. Ivan was waving to her – he

was waving! She stood there, hope rising up in her; then he began to run

towards her. With a glad cry, she broke into a stumbling run herself, and then

she was in his arms.



Tanya

469

Cupping his face in her hands, she stared up at him questioningly,

tears brimming over and running down her cheeks.

„Don‟t cry, Tanya, don‟t cry,‟ he said, then with a cry of sheer joy, lifted

her off her feet, up against his chest, and stared hungrily into her face. „Do

you know,‟ he said softly. „You are even more lovely than the last time I saw

you?‟

Then the tears came in earnest as she sobbed out her joy and relief

against his chest. At last, when she was able to speak, she raised her face to

his.

„How . . . when?‟ she asked.

„I still can‟t believe it myself,‟ he said. „I was so depressed this morning,

I didn‟t want to take the usual walk, so I thought I‟d go a different way. I

walked and walked, for how long I have no idea. All I know is, one minute I

was walking along, then the next, there was nothing under my feet, and I was

falling down a steep slope. I rolled most of the way to the bottom, and must

have knocked myself out. When I came to, I had a pain in my head but

managed to struggle to my feet. I looked up, and I could see something that

looked like a pale disc in front of my eyes. Even as I looked, it began to grow

brighter until it hurt my eyes, then I realised it was the sun. After that, it was

like a mist clearing. Oh, Tanya, already I can see nearly as well as I could

before.‟

Tanya was laughing and crying at the same time, shaking her head

and looking lovingly up into his face. He swung her up into his arms and

began to run towards the horse. Tanya could feel all the old strength and

vigour flowing through him, and for just one moment, the thought flashed into

her mind that now he was fully recovered, she would lose him, that soon he



Tanya

470

would go back to the world of men, and she would have to share him again.

But even as the thought came she banished it, for she would have it no other

way. This was the Ivan she had fallen in love with so long ago – would she

want him any different? No!

He swung her up on to the horse and mounted behind her. Soon they

were galloping up to the house, and Yvette and Peterkin were standing at the

door, wide-eyed at the sight. Ivan leapt down, lifted Tanya into his arms , and

ran to the door.

„Where is my son?‟ he shouted in loud, joyous tones. „Where is my

son? I want to see my son.‟

At that, both Yvette and Peterkin rushed up to him, and he hugged

them both, then he was running up to the nursery, taking the stairs two at a

time. Tanya stayed with the others, thinking that he would perhaps like to be

alone to see his son for the first time. Five minutes later, he was back,

carrying an ecstatic Nicholas who was laughing at the top of his voice at

being tickled and thrown up in the air.

„Well?‟ Tanya looked at these two that she loved more than life, and

they both smiled back at her.

„I think,‟ said Ivan quietly „that he is almost, though not quite, as

beautiful as his mother.‟

Time slipped by rapidly after that day. When Tsar Peter heard that

Ivan‟s sight had returned, he sent his congratulations, then instructions

started to come, and eventually, the order for him to return to Moscow.

Tanya felt a little sad that these halcyon days must now come to an end, but

she could see that Ivan was chafing at the life he led, and she gave in

gracefully, without a word of complaint.



Tanya

471

As winter began to set in, she thought that perhaps it would be good to

be back in the city, for it was bleak out here when the snows came. She even

began to look forward to replenishing her wardrobe and seeing again all the

old friends she had not seen for so long. Perhaps she was not so suited to

the quiet life herself after all, she thought wryly.

So the household began to pack up, and the coaches were filled with

luggage and sent on ahead to Moscow; then Nicholas and his nurses,

together with Peterkin and Yvette, left. Ivan and Tanya had decided to wait

until the next day, so they could have one last day together here before they

left.

They spent the day riding around the estates and wandering hand in

hand round the old house where they had known suc h sadness and such

joy. Their last evening they spent together in front of the fire, talking and

making love.

As Ivan held her in his arms, her splendid body urgent against his

own, her eyes brimming with love, he too felt a fear that never again would

they be this happy, and he held her closer still, until all thoughts but of each

other were banished.

Through a strange, last-minute reluctance to leave, it was midmorning

when they finally set off on their journey. Neither spoke very much, each

content to have the other near. The early winter dusk was falling when the

horses finally pulled the heavy coach up the hill that led to Moscow.

Suddenly, Ivan opened the hatch and ordered the coachman to stop.

Wrapping Tanya up tenderly in her cloak, he took her hand and led her to the

top of the hill. The wind was cold, promising the snow that would soon follow,

and it whipped Tanya‟s hair about her face, but she hardly noticed. They



Tanya

472

stood in silence, looking down at the city spread out before them, and bathed

in the last faint rays of the setting sun.

It looked so quiet and peaceful, although Tanya knew that down there

people were living and loving, struggling, fighting and dying. She looked

towards the grim walls of the Kremlin and remembered another who had died

because he had thirsted for power. And in one of those streets, Nicholas had

died, trying to protect her. Now she was returning to take part once more in

the life of the city. For a moment, she felt the cold shadow of fear pass over

her; then the man at her side put his arm around her shoulders and drew her

close, and she remembered that her son also was down there, and that to be

together with these two whom she loved so much was all that really

mattered. Life, she thought, would not always be smooth, and the y might

again know the danger and suffering that living in this strange, uncivilised

country meant to so many – who knows what the future might bring? She

only knew that although they might be parted again, nothing would ever

really come between them – not distance, not even death. Their love would

go on when all this was dust.

Tanya laid her head against Ivan‟s shoulder and a great happiness

flooded through her. Even as she looked, the spires and roofs of Moscow

shimmered and almost disappeared as the tears of thankfulness blurred her

eyes; then all her doubts vanished, and she knew that no matter where the

man at her side might take her, as long as she was with him, she would be

where she belonged.





