The Day



God



Came to



Earth





Story by



Javonne Cupido





Written by



Aileen Friedman





1

Copyright © 2015 Aileen Friedman

All rights reserved.

No part of this publication, except for brief excerpts for the

purpose of review, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval

system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,

mechanical, photocopying,

recording, or otherwise without the prior written permission of

the publisher, this is a work of fiction. Any resemblance of the

characters to persons living or dead is purely coincidental.





ISBN – 13

978-0-620-68628-0





“It's a great book, a quick read, and it left you breathless and

stunned at the end. Thank God I'm saved!” – Susan Pottberg



2

About the author



Aileen Friedman is an accomplished author, who until recently

lived in South Africa. She and her husband are currently

sojourning around the world for Jesus. Aileen taps into her

personal experiences, both good and bad, fo r inspiration. Her

work has been very well-received not only in South Africa but

throughout the world, for its accessibility and the believable

characters she creates. Having been a dedicated Christian for

many years, and an upstanding member of her community,

Aileen‟s stories carry a message of hope for all her readers.





3

More books by the author

Aileen Friedman





Changes From a Sunset

ISBN 978-0-620-52564-0

Published 2012





When is My Forever

ISBN 978-0-620-55793-1

Published 2013



Second is Best

ISBN 978-0-620-59758-6

Published 2014





The Sparkle in Her Eyes plus Six more Short

Stories

ISBN 978-0-620-64434-1

Published 2015





Available on



Amazon

http://www.amazon.com/-/e/B0073SRDX4





Smashwords

https://www.smashwords.com/profile/view/aileenfriedman



4

Javonne Cupido

cupido.javonne@gmail.com





***





Aileen Friedman



Website

http://aileenfriedman.co.za



Facebook

https://www.facebook.com/groups/353447231333743/



Twitte r

@aileenlf



Email

aileen2462@gmail.com





***





Book Cover Design

Simon Hattingh

seamonkey_studios@outlook.com





5

From

Javonne Cupido



“To God, through whom all things are possible

and to

whom all glory is worthy,

this book has been completed.

In spite of worldly lack of support, I believe that

many souls will be saved through this book



***

From

Aileen Friedman



Thank you, Lord Jesus,

for your love and mercy

and for blessing me

with my family whom I love so much.

I am truly blessed.



Phil 4:13 ‘I can do all things through Christ who strengthens

me.’



***



A very special

THANK YOU

to

Susan Pottberg

For her support and for taking the time

to read this book and offer her

honest criticism.

For being a wonderful inspiration

to everyone that know her and

that are in her presence.

We are forever grateful to know you.



6

1.



Great expectation hung electrified amidst the walls of the

network studios, the stage and editing/recording rooms, the

people scurried from one point to the next fearing the time will

dissipate before they accomplished their designated task. From

the high perches of the network owner to the low stance of the

janitor, they all positively knew this breakout live TV

entertainment talk show was going to be the greatest success of

all TV talk shows.

To their credit the network – SA9 – had snapped up the most

sought after and highly paid TV show host of all time, Jonathan

Bale.

A self- made story of success and wealth, Jonathan started his

career as a journalist for a small town magazine in the

Midlands of Kwa-Zulu Natal. His stories covered the desperate

times of the rural families trying to cope with the

modernization of teenage ideals. As luck would have it, a copy

of the magazine was laying on a coffee table in a doctor‟s

consultation room and was read by an editor of a leading

newspaper in the big city of Cape Town. How the magazine

got to that coffee table, no one will ever know, and yet that was

the making of Jonathan Bale. The editor contacted Jonathan

through the magazine, set up an interview and within a short

period Jonathan was headlining the front pages of the

newspaper with riveting articles in brilliant journalism.

It was not long before he became a household name and his

attractive face spread across the advertising billboards.

Jonathan was handsome, and the camera loved him even

without the use of photoshop. It was no wonder that he was

head hunted by a TV channel that eventually changed his

course of vocation. One network after another stood up and

noticed this man that was making waves and increased the

ratings no matter the show.

Along with his stride into fame came the A listed lifestyle. A

small one bedroom flat was no longer good enough. A second-

hand Golf was too unreliable, and it had to be traded in for a

more modern, more expensive car. That in turn also became

mundane - speed, style and sporty replaced practicality.



7

He met and married a beautiful model (naturally) during this

time of the high life, setting up a home in a penthouse of a

luxurious five-star apartment building. His son and daughter

wanted for nothing, relishing the limelight holding daddy‟s

hands while cameras flashed up the perfect, rich modern family.

On all accounts, Jonathan had kept his image squeaky clean,

the perfect doting family man, righteous, kind, generous,

giving, never forgetting his roots. The all-around perfect

human being.

When the announcement of a new show by the TV networks,

and that Jonathan was to host it, the world went into a wild

frenzy as the countdown to the pilot episode began. No one

except those involved naturally knew the form or fashion of the

expected show. A talk show yes, but what kind of talk show no

one surmised. The public were exhausted with what they

believed it would be.

And so when Jonathan stood in the shadows of the studio, the

lights were dimmed, the live studio audience (that had paid a

fortune to sit in those seats) hushed with a good deal of

difficulty, everyone backstage held their breath. This moment

was it. The start of the biggest thing in TV talk shows.

The music blared out the theme song, Jonathan walked to the

center of the stage – the audience saw a movement and unable

to contain the excitement any longer began to cheer – a single

light hit the center of the set and Jonathan.

The perfect smile of the perfect host in his navy blue Armani

pinstriped suit lifted his arms wide in welcome to all those

watching all over the world. Minutes ticked passed before the

audience calmed down enough for him to speak.

„How you doing?‟ he called out to the world.

It wasn‟t only in the audience that he got a resounding cheer of

“Okay!” in response to his question, it was people in their seats

in their homes, their places of work, restaurants and anywhere

in the entire universe that this show had begun its walk of fame.

„So thrilled you could join our exciting new show. It has sure

been an exciting ride to here hasn‟t it.‟

The audience, the world, yelled their replies.

„Okay, so are you all curious as to what this show is all about?

Do you want to know?



8

He teased, baited, and tickled the audience until the

microphone in his ear told him it was time. It was all about the

timing. Get the audience to a point of hysteria then satisfy their

curiosity because at this peak of enormous hype they‟d buy

anything.

„This show is going to be greater than any talk show ever in the

history of TV; our guests will be leaders from all spectrums

and from all over the world. We want to debate, argue, discuss,

and argue every angle of every topic imaginable. Among these

worldly issues we will also look at different religions – now

I‟m sure that will be heated debates.

The audience for a second considered what was said and then

burst out in a combined cheer of approval.

Now it is without a doubt that if any other host had announced

this, it would have been received with animosity rather than

enthusiasm.

Religion would become the new fad, the new fashion, the new

issue of the world thanks be to the smooth talking, convincing,

lovable Jonathan Bale.

Just before he ended the pilot show, he held a carrot out for all

to try and catch, „After a few episodes we will be announcing

some super exciting news that will make every person sitting in

these seats ecstatically happy. So get those tickets you never

know if it will be your turn. Thank you all for watching our

very first episode of “The Bale Show”. Take care and

goodnight.”

He bowed slowly and gentlemanly never ceasing to smile,

stood up slowly bringing his arms out wide in an embrace to

the universe. He was the master of the networks. He was the

master of the world. Everyone would listen to his every word

and believe it. He was that first-class, and he knew it. He

bowed again still smiling. The cameras faded, the audience

exploded in rapture.

Every show for the entire season sold out by the time he

walked off the stage.

He walked into loud applause from every crew, staff,

management, owners and dignitary waiting in the wings. His

back ached from the congratulatory slaps he received as he



9

made his way to his dressing room where a bottle of the best

Champagne, flowers, chocolates and caviar waited.

Cassia, Willow and Zayn Bale eagerly and proudly welcomed

their husband/father in the privacy of his dressing room.

„We are so proud of you darling. You did a most fantastic job

out there. I love you. So proud of you.‟ Cassia kissed and

hugged Jonathan swelling with pride.

„Daddy, the people clapped so much.‟ Willow said hugging

her father‟s legs filled with pride.

Zayn in his father‟s arms hugged him around his neck tightly,

not exactly aware of the enormity of the occasion at only two

years old.

Jonathan released his family and sat in a chair breathing

heavily. His elbows rested on his knees while he rubbed his

face in his hands smearing his stage makeup. He looked at his

little family beaming with love and adoration „We did it. It was

a success.‟ He breathed out slowly.

„You did it. You were brilliant.‟ Cassia corrected him.

Jonathan glowed in the realization of his accomplishment.





10

2.



The celebrations of the pre-empted success of the show flowed

over at the studio in high spirits. The celebratory champagne

waited patiently on the melting ice until the rating results were

released.

The wine flowed, and the beer guzzled as the party swung

swiftly into momentum. Cassia and the children stayed close to

Jonathan amongst his continued appraise and adoration.

However every so often Jonathan was whisked away to chat

with the main dignitaries and the like, and Cassia with her

children sat like pretty wallflowers against a backdrop of

intertwining vines.

„Can I have your attention, please? Please, people just for a

second quiet down. Your attention please.‟ A man holding a

few sheets of paper bellowed above the din of the party. He

repeated himself several times and assisted by several people

dishing out the same instructions.

A few minutes passed until finally a hum was hovering waiting

for Mr. Eckenberg, the owner of Channel SA9, to speak.

„Ladies and gentleman, Jonathan,‟ he looked around for

Jonathan and so did everyone else „where is Jonathan?

Someone find him he must be here for this.‟

A few men disappeared into the hallways calling out his name.

Cassia stood looking slightly embarrassed when asked where

he was. „He left with a gentleman a few minutes ago.‟ She

could only reply.

A few more minutes went by before Jonathan came rushing

into the studio ushered by those that went looking for him. His

face hot and flushed, although he was expert enough to recover

quickly. „Sorry about that people, had to find a moment to

answer a call of nature.‟ He smiled, blushed and everyone

laughed.

„Jonathan stand here by me my boy,‟ Mr. Eckenberg continued

to make stridently his announcement „I have with me the

ratings for tonight‟s pilot episode of “The Bale Show.” He

paused for dramatic effect as the people called for him to stop

teasing them. „It‟s way outta here! Beaten any record that ever

existed! We have a hit! We have a hit!‟ He held the papers in



11

the air and cheered. Everyone went wild, raising their glasses,

spilling the contents and cheering, hugging each other,

shouting at each other in excitement and mostly everyone was

trying to get Jonathan‟s attention to congratulate him.

If one did not know better, it could have been said that

Jonathan had just won an Oscar for best performance.

Sometime after the announcement Cassia, with their children

who were extremely tired by now, managed to get to speak to

her husband. „So proud of you, congratulations to all of you.‟

„Oh, babe I‟m so happy. Wow, can you believe those ratings. I

hoped for good ones but what we got – WOW.‟ Jonathan was

still hardly able to contain himself.

„I know you need and want to stay for longer, but I must get

the kids home, so I will see you much later I presume.‟

„Are you sure?‟

„Don‟t be silly. Of course you must stay, this is your moment. I

won‟t wait up. Love you and well done again.‟

„Thanks, babe. Love you.‟

Cassia left with the children and Jonathan was free to be

adorned. It was easy to disappear now and then with someone

that was willing to show their admiration for him in more ways

than one. The alcohol flowed in abundance that no one knew

who was coming or going in whichever direction.

By later that morning when Jonathan finally straggled into his

bed, no one would remember half of what happened in the

latter hours of the party and those that did keep mum.

When he floundered into the living room late the next morning,

the sun shone so brightly he felt his head was going to explode

and covered his eyes for protection. Cassia giggled and drew

the blinds closed in sympathy toward him. He sat gingerly in

his leather recliner groaning in agony. „Never again.‟ He

moaned clutching his stomach and his head at the same time.

„You not feeling well daddy?‟ Willow asked holding his hand.

„No baby girl. Not at all.‟

„Willow, you and Zayn please play in your rooms. We can give

daddy his celebration cake later tonight.‟

„Oh babe, I‟m sorry you made something special, and I ruined

it.‟ He noticed through the squint slits of his eyes that they had

redecorated the lounge for a hero.



12

„Its okay later is also fine. Drink this and I‟ll have something

for you to eat in a few minutes.‟

Later that evening Jonathan was treated as if royalty by his

devoted family. The Bale family had been escalated from the

A-list to the A+ list if one even existed.



Show after show, the accolades rained down on the production

and, in particular, Jonathan. The debates on religion, in

particular, raged on as the media pounced on the discussion of

each episode, creating more and more hype. Religion had never

been so widely and openly prevalent across the universe as it

was at this specific moment in time.

After five episodes, the big surprise was announced. The

audience went berserk when they discovered they were the

lucky ones to be filmed live during this announcement.

After a relatively calm first half of the show Jonathan had

revved the hype monitor up a few notches „Who remembers the

“big surprise we promised?‟ The audience squealed.

„Here it is,‟ dramatic pause, smooth smile and a crazed

audience „from this show onwards we will be giving every

person in the audience a gift. We shall call it “Jonathan‟s most

wanted things”, this could be a simple voucher, or it could be

as huge as a Porsche. But whatever the gift you will not go

home empty handed and nor will the gift be less than

R50000.00.‟ He abated the audience with his charm; they were

hysterical. Just then designer envelopes were dropped from the

ceiling attached to a ribbon and floated in front of each person.

„Those envelopes are for you, but wait for my go-ahead to open

them, and, by the way, this gift will never be revealed the same

way in any show.‟

Jonathan smoothed his showmanship smile, shining his white

teeth enjoying the audience‟s eagerness to snatch and rip open

the envelopes.

„Okay,‟ He paused dramatically „Get them!‟ He shouted.

People scrambled to unhook the envelope from the ribbon.

Some were standing, others stretching while there were a few

that pulled the ribbon into them almost pulling the structure

from the ceiling down. Then they settled back into their seats

and waited for the go-ahead to open their envelopes.



13

Jonathan teased them for a second longer and then gestured

with his hands „Open.‟ Is all he said and the audience ripped

and tore open the envelope, pulling out a card and screamed

with sheer delight?

“Congratulations on your gift of a brand new Kia, sponsored

by Masterson Kia, Cape Town.” The news of this episode went

internationally viral.





14

3.



Jonathan‟s personal assistant amidst all the chaos of show

resigned, claiming “personal reasons” of which she refused to

discuss with anyone. Everyone at the studio was shocked as

who wouldn‟t want to work for the most popular TV show in

the world and even more so who wouldn‟t want to work with

Jonathan Bale?

It was down to the last five interviews after undertaking

hundreds of hopeful candidates. During the add break of the

following show, an interview had been set up for Jonathan to

attend. He did, after all, have the final say.

Linda Fulton, a beautiful woman for twenty-two years, with

rich black hair and aqua blue eyes, porcelain skin and red lips –

almost a mirror image of Snow White, arrived to watch the

show while she waited for her interview. She sat in the guest

lounge and felt the intensity filtering through from the studio

audience. She phoned her mother „Mommy it‟s insane, you

cannot believe the atmosphere here, it‟s incredible. And the

studio is so huge it‟s so hard to describe, and there are so many

people working here. I‟m so nervous; I don‟t think I will get

this job, I really don‟t. I think I might faint when Jonathan

walks in the door.‟ Linda finally took a breath and stopped

talking when her mother interrupted her non-stop sentence.

„Now Linda, just calm down, you cannot make Jonathan or the

show bigger than you. Remember your Faith. Remember you

are a child of God and you must not let the world rule your

decisions.‟

„Oh I know mom, I know how much I need this job to get me

out of my financial situation. I know it will be such an

opportunity for me, but I also know I have to keep God first.

We have prayed about this so often I know I will make the

right decision. I think I am just letting the moment get to me. It

is so high profile – you know?‟

„I know dear. I will say a prayer for you now.‟

“Thanks, mom, I‟m going to say a prayer now too.‟ Linda ends

the call and is about to say a prayer when the door opens.



15

She almost faints when Jonathan Bale, the TV show icon,

enters the room and is formally introduced to him. She looked

at him; he was almost larger than life itself.

For a few seconds, she loses herself in his aura then checks

back into reality and recollects herself. „Hello Mr. Bale, it‟s a

pleasure to meet you.‟ She extends her hand in greeting.

He takes her hand in his firm handshake lingering before

letting it go not taking his eyes off her. „Please it‟s just

Jonathan, and it‟s wonderful to meet you. Suzette, you can

leave us now, I‟d like to conduct the interview in private

please.‟ Suzette nodded warily and left closing the door behind

her.

„Please sit Linda.‟ Jonathan motioned to her to sit on the couch

and not the armchair.

Linda was completely awestruck and was having a raging

battle with the enormity of the moment and her faith.

„Linda I must say your CV is most satisfactory, and I think you

and I will work perfectly well together.‟

„You‟ve read my CV? Is there anything you want to ask or

anything you need to know?‟

Jonathan sighed and moved closer to Linda, never for one

moment taking his eyes off of hers. He completely drew her

into him as he milked her every urge to turn away.

„No, I think you‟re perfect.‟ He almost whispered without a

trace of his lie.

„I am confident I will be efficient at the job and will not

disappoint you.‟

„Jonathan edged closer to Linda on the couch, he held her eyes

in his „Linda, you will never disappoint me I‟m sure of it. The

job is yours if you will just ..‟ He implored her still further with

his eyes creeping nearer to her face „just… you are so

incredibly pretty.‟

„Mr…Jonathan, what are you doing?‟ Linda was so intoxicated

by the closeness of Jonathan and tried with all her might to

resist him to hang on to her high morals and pride.

„Don‟t fight this Linda; I knew this was meant to be the minute

I laid eyes on you. The job is yours; we can be so good

together. Please, Linda, I can‟t resist you.‟ His nose touched



16

hers; his fresh breath flavoured her lips. „Please, Linda. I want

you.‟

„I can‟t Jonathan; I can‟t …this is so wrong. I have never..‟

„Never what Linda?‟ He touched her lips with his – ever so

softly. She groaned a little.

„I‟m a virgin. I don‟t want to do this, please.‟ She tried futilely

to stop his reaching arms wrapping around her waist, tugging

her toward him.

„You want to Linda. I know you do.‟ Then he kissed her,

opening her mouth to his. She tried to resist, but he held her

tightly and continued to kiss her until she responded in kind.

„I‟ll be your first Linda and your last. I promise you.‟ He

whispered into her ears as he caressed her neck until she

squirmed wanting more but still trying to hold onto the last bit

of her resisting will.

His hands moved all over her body; he whispered little

nothings to her keeping her under his spell. He swooped her

down until she was lying on the couch and he was on top of her

„Linda we must do this, it is right, please Linda.‟

She moaned through his kisses and could resist no more and

gave herself to him completely

Virgin she was no more!





17

4.



He sat up breathing heavily, immediately closing the buttons

on his shirt, pulling and a handkerchief from the pocket of his

pants and cleaning himself. He closed his pants and stood up.

Linda lay on the couch in turmoil as the array of heated

emotions rapidly wound down, and her common sense started

to hit home. Tears drifted down her cheeks, increasing in time

with her guilt and shame. She covered her face with her hands

and cried, wanting so badly to be reassured by Jonathan and for

him to comfort and hold her. Her clothes tangled in a creased

mess about her; her blouse still unbuttoned exposing her naked

chest. With one arm, she lamely closed up.

„Be at work at six o‟clock tomorrow, don‟t be late.‟ Jonathan

stood up, brushed his hair with his comb and le ft.

Linda was devastated and sobbed trying at the same time to re-

dress herself. She hurriedly went to the en-suite bathroom of

the guest lounge and locked the door behind her.

„Oh, what have I done, oh no what did I do. How could I?‟ She

hollered to herself in pain and utter anguish.

She sat on the seat of the toilet and rocked herself to and fro

trying to squeeze out the disgust that was sweeping through her

veins.

After a long and harrowing half an hour, she stood up and

cleaned herself at the wash basin, but just looking at her body

brought on the guilty act and was released through a welt of

sobbing jerks.

Another hour and with someone knocking on the other side of

the door, Linda washed her face, ran her fingers through her

hair, opened the door and ran from the building, holding her

breath, not looking at anyone on her way out. When she

reached the fresh air on the sidewalk to the car park, she yelled

out to the sky „Nooo.‟ and leant against a lamp pole, hugging

onto to it for support.

A security officer on observing her extreme distress came to

her aid, but she refused it. He would not budge and insisted he

helped her to her car. Not wanting to draw any more attention

to her evil and disgusting self she allowed him to lead her to

her car.



18

Once inside and with legs that shook almost uncontrollably she

slowly pulled away and at a speed similar to that of a snail she

edged her way home.



„Thank you for joining us tonight, till next week take care and

goodnight.‟ Jonathan bowed and reversed off the stage to a

rapturous applause.

„So how did the interview go? Do you have an assistant as of

tomorrow?‟ Suzette asked with a vivid scowl on her face.

Jonathan returned her scowl with a dirty smirk of arrogance

„Yes I do. She will do just fine for me.‟

„You‟re a pig.‟ Suzette spat at him.

„How about I fire you!‟

„The graveyard is full of indispensable people you piece of

filth.‟ Suzette stormed off to wrap up her work for the day.

Jonathan stared after her contemplating in puzzlement at her

statement.



Linda dived onto her bed and cried and cried and cried for

hours curled into a ball of dirty indignity.

Drenched with her tears and weak; she slouched to the

bathroom and began to run a hot bath in an attempt to wash the

deed off her body. She knelt beside the bath and automatically

began to pray „Oh Lord, Oh please Lord I am in shame, I have

sinned in the worst way Lord, please, please, please forgive me,

Lord. I beg of you Lord, please forgive my weakness. In Jesus

name please Lord, Amen.‟

After so many tears had poured out of her soul, she still found

more to shed.

Once she felt a smidgen refreshed and could no longer feel

Jonathan on her skin, she drove to her church, the Church of

Christ, three blocks away from her flat, and prayed all the way

that Minister Clyde would be in his office.

Standing at the door to Minister Clyde‟s office, Linda‟s limbs

refused to co-operate and knock or take another step into the

office. Minister Clyde sensing someone was behind him turned

around and was shocked to see a phantom of the woman he

knew as Linda.



19

„Linda! Good gravy! What has happened? Sit down before you

faint.‟

She poured out her soul to minister Clyde, taunted that she had

ruined herself in such a cheap and dirty manner. Horrified that

her faith and her will to do God‟s will had been so weak. She

wanted rather to kill herself than have the reminder every

second of every day of what a sinful and undeserving servant

she was.

With a lot of consoling and comforting minister Clyde had

finally managed to bring Linda to a state o f normality and to

speak of how to move forward from that point. They would

study together every day for the next two weeks and after that

once a week until Minister Clyde was satisfied Linda was able

to move on from this disastrous act.

Linda would completely and utterly give herself back to her

Creator and her K ing, but to do that the first thing she did was

make a phone call „Hello Suzette, it‟s Linda. I will not be

taking the job.‟

„Can I ask why?‟

„I think you know. Goodbye.‟ When that call ended the first

tiniest piece of string started to knit Linda‟s life back together.





20

5.



The ratings and the front page news of “The Bale Show” went

up higher and higher with every show. Suzette had carefully

screened the next bunch of candidates for Jonathan‟s assistant

and in the end, the situation got so desperate that the show

director insisted Suzette appoint whomever she felt was the

best candidate. Jonathan‟s new assistant was a forty-five-year-

old battle axe, namely Gertrude, who did not tolerate him or his

time of day. Jonathan threw a fit and a half at her appointment

but could do nothing about it. His temper and tantrums

increased as the days passed.



The countdown by the audience had commenced, Jonathan

stood in the wings while the music theme blared away all the

speakers. “One” the audience screamed, and Jonathan walked

to the center of the set as the lights brightened and focused on

him.

Alex, a stage handler who had been working with this

particular company for many years longer than Jonathan,

accidentally caused one of the stage lights to fall. It missed

Jonathan by millimeters just as he scooted to one side when the

stage hands and crew yelled for him to get out of the way. He

fell over a chair in the process landing in an unceremonious

manner on the floor. The light crashed and sent shrapnel of

glass and metal spraying everywhere.

The audience screeched in alarm then went dead silent in

anticipation of Jonathan‟s recovery.

Staff and crew all simultaneously left their posts and ra n to the

fallen Jonathan. A stage hand had got to him first „You okay?‟

he asked anxiously.

Someone moved the chair releasing Jonathan‟s leg that was

beneath it. Jonathan took a minute to assess his surroundings

and what had happened before rolling onto his knees and

pushing himself up.

He stood up, straightening his suit and hair, looked about him

and yelled „Who the blank blank blank blankety blank did

that?‟

The audience gasped.



21

A cumulative of voices informed him that it had been an

accident and that the guilty person was indeed Alex.

Jonathan swung about searching for Alex, who was by now a

frozen statue, still standing by the camera frame and fearing

what was going to come next.

Jonathan brushed past the crowded people, took two wide steps

and stood directly in front of Alex‟s face, staring him down

with angry contempt.

„You are bleep bleep bleepety bleeped fired. Get out of here

you blip blip blipped moron.‟

The audience gasped.

The producer of the show rushed onto the set grabbing

Jonathan‟s arm and scurried him off the set at the same time

leaving instructions for someone to get Alex to a safe place off

set too.

The rest of the staff and crew, not knowing how to react in

such a situation, mulled about in the shadows waiting for

further instructions and replaying the event in their minds and

with each other.

The audience slowly roused their voices as they too began to

replay what had just occurred and to express their mortification

of their idol‟s actions.



The start of the evening's show had to forcibly delayed while

they cleaned up the set and Jonathan cooled down in his

dressing room. The topic for the evening coincidently was on

language behaviour and, in particular, blasphemy. It was a

sticky start to the show and Jonathan knew before the show

ended he had to recover it somehow. The front page news was

already a given, unfortunately.

During the interval break Jonathan sought out Alex hoping he

had not left the premises yet. He found him in the produces

office disputing his termination.

„Sorry, I forgot your name.‟ Jonathan said to Alex as he

entered.

„Easy to fire someone when you cannot remember their name.‟

Alex retorted.

„Look I‟m sorry, I apologize for firing you in front of everyone

in such a manner. I was shocked, and I over reacted. You are



22

obviously not fired.‟ He put out his hand to Alex in a peace

offering gesture. His face perfectly pulled into a remorseful

pose.

Alex hesitantly stood and shook his hand „Okay.‟ He said and

left the office not exactly enthusiastic to face everyone.

However, everyone seemed to be on his side.



The interval was over, and Jonathan walked to the centre of the

set, mockingly dodging the lights and cameras. The audience

was too much in love with him to not forgive his little tantrum

and immediately laughed at his antics.

He stood in front of the set right in front of the stage, put on his

best “I‟m Sorry” face and held out his hands to the audience

and the cameras.

„So I behaved extremely badly earlier, and I apologize to

everyone here and across the world and espec ially to the

children, please don‟t ever do what I did. That type of

behaviour is never the answer and to show you how much I

deeply regret my actions‟ he looked to the wings of the stage

and to the crew standing around the set until he found Alex

„ Alex, please come here. Please.‟ He held out his hand

gesturing toward

Alex.

Alex hesitated at first not wanting to be Jonathan‟s peace

offering but the audience began to chant “Alex, Alex, Alex,

Alex.” He had no choice but to oblige.

„Thank you Alex. Ladies and gentleman Alex is not fired. Alex,

please forgive me?‟

Alex nodded his head and sheepishly slithered back to his spot.

The audience cheered.

Show recovered.

The ratings for that evening's show broke the record that the

first pilot episode had already broken.





23

6.



Jonathan rode the pristine elevator to his penthouse, mentally

exhausted and frustrated from the events of the day. He opened

the massive uniquely carved wooden door and stepped into his

home of peace and love and tranquility. Willow and Zayn

heard his entry and ran as they always did to welcome their

father, their hero, home. He bent down and hugged them both a

little longer and a little tighter than usual. Cassia came up

behind the children wiping her hands on a dish towel well

aware of what had taken place on set.

„Hey babe, how you feeling?‟

Jonathan looked at her questionably enquiring with his eyes as

to whether she had watched the show or not. Cassia motioned

with her a nod of her head for him to join her in the kitchen. He

stood up and followed her.

Entering the kitchen, the children ran back to the movie they

were watching, Cassia handed Jonathan a glass of red wine.

Jonathan took a gulp of wine, let out a long breath of air and a

heavy sigh. He leant against the counter with his rear and

started the conversation „So you saw my little theatrics.‟

„Babe what happened? You have never lost your temper like

that ever. Is the pressure getting to you?‟ Cassia could hardly

understand what had caused her perfect gentleman of a

husband to react the way he did. She stroked his hair around

his ear lovingly.

„I don‟t know what happened. It was like something snapped

inside of me when I fell over the chair. I got such a fright when

that light crashed right next to me. My heart was pounding so

wildly; I had no control over what I was saying it all just flew

out of my mouth. I felt so bad and for the entire first half, all I

thought about was that that performance was my last. I just had

to make it right again for the show, Alex and everyone

involved. I still don‟t think Alex has forgiven me.‟ He downed

the rest of his wine and poured another glass, throwing down a

swig before standing it on the counter top.

Cassia embraced her husband „I will call Dr Dravid tomorrow

and get him to prescribe something for anxiety just for when

you need it. Jonathan began to protest, but Cassia put her



24

fingers on his lips and insisted - he was too tired to bother

arguing.

Cassia ran a huge hot bath with essential oils and bubbles and

assisted Jonathan into the bath to soak away the day and ease

the tension in his body. He rested back in the massive tub

drifting into a solace of tranquility. There was a tap on the door

„Come in.‟

Willow and Zayn quietly stepped closer to the bathtub to say

good night.

Cassia handed Jonathan two white pills and a glass of water

before ushering the children to bed.

Jonathan relished the silence and the warm water shriveling his

skin in its soothing therapy. He looked about at his massive en-

suite bathroom – gold taps and towel rails, grey marble tiles,

black marble surface top around the gold wash basins, water

jets in the bath to massage your body (that were currently on),

the shower was the size of an average middle-class bathroom.

He smiled at his afforded luxury which helped him to recover

further.

An hour later thudded into his custom designed king sized bed,

with satin sheets directly from the bath and thanks to the two

white pills fell asleep immediately.

His conscious however had other plans than allowing a

peaceful night‟s sleep, he tossed and turned restlessly until at

almost three in the morning he was wide awake. He tried to go

back to sleep but to no avail, so he did the next best thing and

went to the kitchen for a cup of coffee. While he had the

chance of being alone and without distraction, he could catch

up on some work. He had meant to research new material for

the show.

The light flicked on and brightly reflected off the stone black

marble worktops; the grey cupboards enhanced the black.

Cassia never went to bed unless her massive kitchen was

spotlessly clean. The grey tiled floor sparkled it was so clean

that it could reflect your image. The water in the kettle boiled

on the Smeg gas stove; the kettle whistled for attention.

Jonathan pulled out his favourite coffee mug – “World‟s

greatest dad” was painted on it – and made himself a cup of

expensive Colombian coffee. When he had these mornings of



25

no sleep, he preferred the very expensive imported Colombian

coffee to that from the Italian coffee in an overpriced coffee

machine.

He took his coffee to his home office, turned on his laptop and

started researching. He had a niggle bugging his sub-conscious

of something he could not yet figure out.





26

7.



The advantage of living in such a high effluent and luxurious

apartment building was that the Bale family had protection

from the fanatical media. Not so in the public arena.

Jonathan pulled into the parking lot of the church he and his

family attended and simultaneously was assaulted by a mass of

journalist clambering onto his car, running with it until he

brought it to a stop in a parking bay. The family usually adored

the journalist‟s attention, but not today for obvious reasons.

People that had already arrived for the morning service helped

to get Jonathan and his family into the building, fighting and

pushing away the cameras that callously got shoved into their

faces.

The Bale family slightly traumatized sat in their regular seats

waiting for the church service to begin while their friends and

other members comforted them, especially the children.

The journalists crowded the back of the auditorium, their

cameras set up waiting, hoping for a scoop.

Jonathan, knowing that the scandal-starved journalists would

not leave, got up and went to the back of the stage to speak

with the leader (pastor) of the church.

The cameras went frantic.

He returned to his seat and spoke earnestly in Cassia‟s ear.

The cameras went frantic.

The pastor stood in front of the auditorium behind his pulpit.

He raised his hands toward the journalists „Before we begin

service today; I have an announcement. Since we have been

overrun this morning by these journalists, Jonathan Bale will

give a statement to them. And then I asked you all please to put

away your cameras and enjoy the rest of the service.‟ The

journalists murmured and grinned in sensational hunger,

nodding their approval to the pastor. The people seated in their

pews had all turned around to look at the journalists and then

swung around again back to face the pastor.

It was moments later when Jonathan stood up to a loud clicking

of camera shutters, people‟s low-toned voices and applause.

What the applause was for no one knew but some felt it was

justified.



27

He stood behind the pulpit without shame or anxiety - this was

his talent; he played with an audience every week it was only

the setting that was different.

„Pastor Mike, members of the congregation, press thank you

for affording me this opportunity to repent and to hear my

apologies. Yesterday I behaved wickedly. I am ashamed at the

way I reacted to the incident, I can only pray that Alex will

truly forgive me and so will you all. That includes those of you

watching on the TV. I cannot make an excuse for why I reacted

the way I did. I simply don‟t have one, when I realized what I

was saying it was obviously too late. Clearly this is not a

behaviour we are trying to instill in our children and the future

generation, so I beg of you, please do not use that outburst as

true guidance but to rather listen to my apology and learn from

my experience. I ask God to please forgive me. Please forgive

the harm I have caused and I ask God that people will not do as

I did ever in their life.

May I also ask the journalist to now, please turn off your

cameras and remain for the rest of the service?‟

His words were, so sugar coated they melted in his mouth, he

even shed a few tears that crawled into everyone‟s sympathetic

hearts. Meekly he sat down next to Cassia after embracing

Pastor Mike in a sobering hug. Cassia linked her arm through

his and rested her head, crying, into his neck with such

affection every person watching felt the tears she shed with

their own.

The journalist switched off their cameras and left the building –

the front page scoop was all that interested them, certainly not

meaningless words from a pastor.

After the service Jonathan suggested they take a drive out to

the country, to get away from the madness for awhile.

Surprised Cassia agreed, it would do them all good to have a

change of scenery.

He drove their Mercedes S-class sedan out of the city, and

immediately the stillness of the outer city limits relinquished

the tension in the interior of the car. Willow and Zayn started

watching a movie on their TV screens with the earphones on.

Jonathan and Cassia sat in silence for several kilometers.



28

Way into their journey through the countryside Cassia broke

the silence „Any idea where we are going?‟

Jonathan shrugged his shoulders „Let‟s just see where we land

up. It‟s been a long time since we‟ve even ventured outside of

the city.‟

They smiled at each other Jonathan reached out to hold

Cassia‟s hand that she‟d willingly offered.

After an hour and a half of driving through luscious green

forests and farmlands, hardly speaking but rather listening to

their favourite music played just loud enough for them to hear

and appreciate Jonathan ushered his family into a country hotel

on the outskirts of Ceres.

While Jonathan reserved a table for him and his family for

lunch in the posh A-La-Carte restaurant, Cassia took the

children to the bathroom.

„Uhm, Mr. Bale, so that wouldn‟t be the TV Mr. Bale now

would it?‟ The concierge asked with a glimmer of hope and

adoration in her eyes.

„If I say yes, you will not call the press I hope. Sure had

enough of them this week.‟ He smiled his charming grin,

flashing his perfect white expensive teeth.

„Only if I can have a photo with you, I love your shows.‟ She

flirted.

„Okay that we can arrange. You have a camera or phone.‟



She whipped out her cell phone got to the camera app in a flash

and stood next to Jonathan, her arm around his waist smiling in

the pose for a selfie. Jonathan put his arm around her waist, his

hand touched the front of her tummy as her waist was so tiny.

As he bent down to her side to fit in the photo, her perfume

whiffed up his nostrils. Immediately he felt aroused.

„So you going to send me the photo?‟ He asked watching her

delight as she excitedly checked that the photo was perfect. It

undoubtedly was her next Facebook profile picture within the

next few seconds.

„Really?‟ she asked surprised.

„Yes sure, here is my number.‟

„Myra could hardly believe her luck – having a photo with the

famous and gorgeous Jonathan Bale and getting his phone

number too.



29

Cassia rejoined them with the children and ushered to their

table on the patio overlooking the vast vineyards and majestic

mountains.

„This is our most private table only offered to honoured

guests.‟ She proudly stated with the warmth of a professional

host.

„And we are most honoured. Thank you.‟ Jonathan replied in

slick response.

They weren‟t seated for long when his phone buzzed. „I

thought you were going to switch it off today?‟ Cassia asked a

little disappointed.

„I am.‟ He pretended to switch it off. Instead, he only turned

down the volume and observed as his beautiful model of a wife

immediately released the frown creasing her emerald green

eyes. He looked at her, leant over and kissed her ever so

tenderly „I love you.‟ He whispered stroking the back of his

forefinger down her porcelain cheek.

She glowed, her cheeks red and with the slight breeze her jet

black hair fluttered about making her more beautiful, more

vulnerable than he had noticed in a long time. Already aroused

by Myra‟s tiny waist he had the urge to grab her in an embrace

and kiss the life out of her. He sat back and smiled, blowing

her a kiss and chasing down the desires he was experiencing.

A waitress brought their drinks they had ordered and informed

them the first course was on its way.

After the second course of the menu, Jonathan excused himself

to go to the bathroom passing the concierge along the way,

smiling and winking at her watching as her heart floundered

into a crimson respondent.

Once in the bathroom stall, he locked the door and sat on the

toilet (the lid down) taking out his cell phone.

He replied to her message “Thank you for the photo. You are

beautiful.”

He sat waiting just in case she sent a reply.

He kept the phone on silent, just in case and watched the screen

for a few minutes. It flashed alive; quickly he opened the

message.

It read “Thank you. I am flattered, especially coming from you.

I think you are a wonderful person.”



30

He replied, “How wonderful?”

He waited, his heart beating slightly faster while his desire to

conquer his urges took precedent in his mind.

“Where are you?” She replied.

“In the men‟s room.”

The door flung open and locked shut. Jonathan smugly grinned.

He prided himself on his charm. He clicked open the stall door,

reached out and pulled Myra into his arms locking the door

behind him again.

He left first leaving Myra to make sure she did not get caught

leaving. She quickly locked the door, so she was able to adjust

herself before another male came bursting through the doors.

She looked at herself in the mirror, flushed and out of breath.

She smiled at herself completely convinced she had won the

heart of Jonathan Bale.

„What took you so long?‟ Asked Cassia when he finally sat

down to begin the next course on the menu.

„I had the worst cramps, probably just the stress of the day.‟ He

looked away and paid attention to Willow and Zayn instead.

„Is everything to your satisfaction?‟ Myra asked as she

approached the table, gleefully gazing at Jonathan.

„Just fine.‟ Cassia said and without missing the star-struck look

on Myra‟s face.

Myra hesitantly left them alone disappointed it was not

Jonathan that had spoken to her, that he had other than a nod

and a smile ignored her.

„Shame she can‟t believe she is in your presence.‟ Cassia

giggled.

„What do you mean by that?‟ Jonathan retorted.

„Oh come on babe. All women glow when they‟re in your

presence. We all know that.‟ She laughed teasing him.

„Do you glow?‟ He teased her back placing his hand on her

thigh under the table sliding it up to her groin.

„Stop it.‟ She laughed pushing his hand down. „Wait till we get

home.‟

„Don‟t know if I can wait that long.‟ He kissed her intently

until the children groaned their disgust and he pulled away

laughing.



31

He leant backwards in his seat looking over his shoulder

behind him, deliberately wanting to see Myra as she stood

sullenly watching them in the shadows.

The meal finished, and while Jonathan paid the bill, Cassia

walked on the smooth, bright green grass in front of the patio.

He felt the vibration of his phone in his pocket took it out half

under the table and read the message. “You are incredible. Can

we meet again soon?”

Jonathan replied, “Who is this?”

Myra was devastated finally realizing that she had fallen victim

by the world‟s smoothest player, that all she had done was to

increase his desire to have his wife in fullness and that she was

wrung out like a used wash rag. She ran out of the building to

her car not wanting to see him again.

He was beyond happy all the way home. The children went

straight to bed tired from the traveling, and that meant Jonathan

could ravish Cassia until his frustration, desires and needs

finally met his lust.





32

8.



The sun was yet to rise as Jonathan drove out of the basement

parking garage of the building. He was as calm as the quietness

of the morning – rush hour was still three hours away. He slid

his slick sports car onto the road and pushed down hard on the

gas pedal. The car revved into speed, and soon Jonathan and

his baby were hightailing down the highway - way, way over

the speed limit towards the studios. He loved this time of the

morning when he was able to get a little power out of the

engines and drive the car as it was meant to – super fast. If he

did ever get caught well then he was Jonathan Bale after all,

and he was positive he would get away with it, or he‟d just pay

the fine. It definitely wouldn‟t make a dent in his bank account.

He breezed into the studios whistling smiling and greeting

everyone, even if it was just a nod of his head.

„Jonathan.‟ Glynn shouted from his producer‟s office as

Jonathan was walking past. He stopped in his tracks, backed up

about four paces and popped his head in Glynn‟s office door.

„What‟s up?‟

„Come in. Close the door.‟

Jonathan proceeded to do so as instructed not losing his bounce

since he had woken up.

„There a problem?‟

„Have you seen the headlines this morning?‟ Glynn asked and

handed a copy of the Times newspaper to him over the desk.

Jonathan sat in the chair and opened the paper to see the huge

photo on the front page of Jonathan behind the podium of his

church “Bale gets bailed out.” the headline read. He read the

article to the end gave a “humph” afterward and handed the

paper back to Glynn.

„And?‟ Jonathan asked not sure whether they were happy or

unhappy with the article.

„Bravo!‟ Glynn applauded. „We couldn‟t have scripted that

better ourselves. Mr. Eckenberg phoned and told me to

congratulate you on the excellent damage control.‟

Jonathan laughed, lifted his hands from the arms of the chair

and said „What can I say, it is my gift.‟ He was smug and full

of it, and he knew it. He knew he was taking the credit as if he



33

had planned the whole thing, but who would know otherwise

unless he informed them so, for now, he would be the hero to

the network bosses.

„One more thing, the gifts lately have been mediocre so in next

week‟s show it is going to be a whopper, get prepared!

He saluted Glynn as he stood up and left his office whistling

once more on his way to his dressing room.

He mirrored his image and was pleased with himself. He

looked exceptionally handsome today. His sleek black suit

enhanced his grayish blue eyes – a most unusual colour that

merely added to the intrigue of his personality. His thick finely

styled hair matched that of the suit, perfectly groomed and the

groomed gentleman.

A knock on the door interrupted his admiring thoughts of

himself; „Come in.‟ he said and groaned when Gertrude‟s face

appeared around the door.

„Good morning boss.‟

„Glad you know it?‟

„Know what boss?‟

„That I‟m your boss. I can also get you fired too.‟

„That‟s why I call you boss.‟ She mocked him. As much as he

tried to get her to do or say something wrong he just couldn‟t

she had won every round of their continuous dance. „You can‟t,

you won‟t so I wish you would give up trying.‟

She went to his dresser table and plopped the script for the

show on it. „Well done on the damage control. It‟s the talk of

the studio this morning.‟

A little taken aback by hearing a compliment from Gertrude,

Jonathan nodded his head never taking his eyes off her in

distrust. „Thanks, it‟s what I do best.‟

„Really now. Hmm.‟ Gertrude replied on her way out leaving

Jonathan‟s good mood dampened.

„No ways! She is not going to ruin my good mood today. She

can go to hell; she is not going to win this round.‟ He spoke to

himself in the mirror, reassuring himself that he was going to

remain in his current mood status the entire day.

The pre-rehearsal meeting was announced to begin any minute,

and everyone concerned sat around the large oval-shaped

mahogany table in the boardroom.



34

Again Jonathan was praised for his supposedly self thought-up

damage control article in the press, and again he took all credit

for it. Everyone except Gertrude and Suzanne applauded.

Jonathan stood and took a bow.





35

9.



As Jonathan stepped out of the backstage door onto the street,

his usual hoards of fans cheered at him in appreciation of

another fine performance. Another show that debated religion

furiously argued and resulted without consensus.

The limo door opened, and he gave a final wave goodbye to his

fans before climbing in. His status in the world had reached

such magnitude it was no longer possible for him to drive his

beloved sports car to work every day. Being chauffeured in a

limo was also advantageous as he was constantly on the phone,

tablet or his laptop.

„Home?‟ Mervin, Jonathan‟s personal driver, asked as he

pulled the long body of the car out into the open street.

„Yes.‟ Jonathan closed the window between the two of them as

soon as he had replied.

It was one of those evenings when you‟d catch every robot red

and so the journey home was arduous and annoying. At almost

every robot who ever pulled up next to the limo would hoot

and wave hoping Jonathan wound his window down and

greeted them. Mostly he didn‟t, but they would yell and shout

out to him and then have the pleasure of telling all their friends

and family they parked next to his limo. A highly insignificant

and pointless exercise on their part and yet they felt elated by it.

Jonathan had just put his phone down on the wide seat and

reached to the bar cabinet when he felt a strange presence

around him. He looked about and obviously not seeing

anything or anyone shook his head and resumed his act of

opening the cabinet door.

He leant back and shook off his suit jacket, folding it neatly

and placing it tidily alongside the cell phone on the seat.

Shifting in his seat slightly forward, he opened the whiskey

decanter, savouring the aroma, and filled the glass three-

quarters fill.

The same strange sensation whirred about him again, and while

leaning back into the seat, he looked about him again ready to

chastise himself once more.

Instead, he jumped into the corner of the seat when he noticed

a man sitting next to him.



36

„How? Where? How? Who are? How?‟ Jonathan rambled; his

hands shook with fear and fright spilling his ludicrously

expensive whiskey all over his designer pants and the seat. He

tried to take a sip to calm himself, but that only landed up

being spluttered over his immaculate shirt and tie. He somehow

managed to put the glass that contained a few drops left by now,

onto the shelf the cabinet door provided.

In fear and panic, he pressed the intercom to Mervin. It was

disconnected.

Jonathan stared at the dark shadow of a person sitting next to

him, his suit jacket untouched. He opened his mouth, but no

words came from his lips. He tried again. Silence! His voice

was gone.

„Jonathan, I am not going to hurt you.‟ A deep baritone voice

rumbled.

With eyes wild and largely rounded, Jonathan stared at the

shadowy form. A sudden thought struck him, and he pounced

onto the window separating him and Mervin.

Mervin never moved a muscle, concentrating on the road ahead

without acknowledging Jonathan‟s banging on the window

immediately behind his head.

Jonathan flung himself back into the corner of the seat gripping

the door with force, trying to open it.

„Jonathan, be calm. I am not going to hurt you.‟ The voice

shuddered in his eardrums.

“How was it possible that this person got into the limo? How

was it possible that Mervin had not heard or noticed anything

amiss back here?” He scrambled his confused thoughts.

„Do not concern yourself with all the irrelevant questions

Jonathan. I am here in your wonderful posh car, and I have

something to tell you.‟

Jonathan‟s throat was quivering as he tried to speak.

„You cannot speak for now. It is better this way.‟

Jonathan‟s eyes wildly wide with anxiety; they began to tear

rapidly. His chest started to heave as he battled to correct his

breathing and to get air back into his lungs after shutting them

down in fright. A cold sweat seeped out of the pores of his skin

and inside he was whimpering like a dog begging for mercy.



37

„I can see that whatever I tell you now will not sit with you. I

will visit you another time. Just remember only you can see me

and while I am in your midst the world around you will not

notice anything different about you. In fact, they will not even

be aware of the minutes that have elapsed. Let‟s just say they

will be in a limbo state.‟

Jonathan did not nod, shake his head or acknowledge what the

shadow had said – he only stared with crazy wild eyes.

„Okay, Jonathan I will leave now. You won‟t see me leave, and

this will be like a nagging headache for you. You won‟t

remember it, but your subconscious will have an itchy feeling

that something happened. Like when you know you have to do

something, but you just can‟t remember. „ The shadow laughed

boisterously „It won‟t help to tell or even try to discuss this

with anyone as they will probably think you are mad or over

stressed.‟ He laughed again louder. Jonathan looked to Mervin

hoping he had heard this overly loud horrendous laugh but

nothing – he simply continued to drive home.

When Jonathan took his eyes off Mervin, there was a sound

peace in the car. He looked at his suit jacket folded neatly

untouched next to him. That is all that was there with him in

the car. He coughed returning his voice. He was confused and

did not know why. He wiped his brow with his silk

handkerchief wondering why he felt so bewildered and so

anxious, why he was sweating for no reason and for goodness

sake why had he spilt his whiskey all over himself and the car.

He poured another drink, swallowed it in one mouthful poured

another and sat back chasing down his beating heart. He sipped

slowly on whiskey pondering what it was he had to do that he

was forgetting.

Mervin parked the limo in the private parking of the building

and waited until Jonathan‟s bodyguards were in position before

opening the rear door.

„Sorry sir, did I go over a bump to hard. You seemed to have

spilled on your shirt. Next time sir bang on the window or yell

at me over the intercom so I can be aware if your trip is

unpleasant. Again I apologise sir.‟

Jonathan grunted and walked toward the elevator. He had no

rebuttal as he had no recollection of when it happened.



38

„What happened to you?‟ Cassia asked as he walked into the

penthouse apartment.

„Mervin went over a bump a little too hard.‟ Jonathan shook his

head. To Cassia, it was a head shake in disgust to Jonathan it

meant confusion.

He took a long, long shower trying to wash away the nagging

feeling in his brain and after eating a perfectly cooked meal

and spending a few quality minutes with his children before

they went to sleep; he sat in his favourite recliner watching the

television news channels. Cassia bro ught him a glass of his

favourite red wine and sat in the recliner next to his.

„Is there something I have to do or go to?‟

„Pardon?‟ Cassia replied slightly bemused.

„I keep having this feeling that I‟ve forgotten something

important. It‟s very annoying.‟

„Well, not that I know. You had better check with Gertrude.

Send her a message now in case there is an important issue

early tomorrow you have forgotten.‟

Without replying Jonathan picked up his phone from the table

next to him and sent Gertrude a message “Anything important

on for tomorrow? Don‟t want to have forgotten anything.‟

He waited, sipped his wine in fast gulps while he did so and

held the phone in his hand.

His phone blipped, and quickly he put his glass down to

retrieve the message.

“Nothing that is not on your planner, on your phone or tablet.”

He immediately checked his planner. Everything on his planner

for the next day was as he recalled. He gulped down the rest of

the wine.

„Find out what it is?‟ Cassia enquired very curiously. She‟d

never seen him so concerned over forgetting something he

wasn‟t sure he‟d even forgotten.

„Nope, there isn‟t anything.‟

„I think you just need a good night rest babe.‟

„Perhaps you‟re right. I‟ll take one of those pills your doctor

gave me too.‟ He got up from his recliner and walked into the

kitchen rubbing his head wearily.



39

With the last sip of wine, he swallowed the little pill, trudged

wearily to his bedroom to hopefully overcome his weird

thoughts and sensations of the evening.

He slept like a log until almost three in the morning, an hour

before his alarm was to go off. He knew he wouldn‟t go back

to sleep, so he slopped his way to the kitchen for a cup of his

favourite Colombian coffee and then to his study.

He sat at his desk reading the emails that had overflowed his

inbox. He yawned and turned around in his swivel chair to face

the window and the shadows over the city. For a few minutes,

he gazed blankly out into nowhere then he rubbed his eyes and

turned back around to face his desk and his laptop.

He bolted right out of the chair when he saw a shadow of a

person standing in front of his desk.





40

10.



„I wonder if you are ready for me now Jonathan.‟ A deep voice

echoed throughout his study.

Jonathan coughed and coughed trying to force his voice to

work it only resulted in a sore throat.

„If you remember last night in your car nod your head.‟

Jonathan nodded feverishly.

„Ah good! You will only recall this when I am in your presence.

Now I wonder if you are ready to hear me yet.‟ He held out

what seemed to Jonathan as a hand, and a terrified Jonathan

pushed himself backward into his chair tipping it over along

with himself.

After a scramble and a scurry, he found his feet and stood up

planting his back against the window. The hair on his neck

stood on edge.

„I guess not. Well, I will just have to come again. You will be

ready for me the next time. I will be sure of that.‟

Jonathan coughed as he stroked his sore throat. He rubbed his

forehead, wiping the cold droplets onto his hand. He frowned

looking at his hand and touching his sore throat with the other

hand.

“I must be getting sick. Better get something for this

immediately. Can‟t afford to be sick now or ever.” He thought

while he dug in the medicine chest for suitable medication.

After taking two pills he went back to bed, Cassia was sound

asleep beautifully dreaming, and so he calmly lay down next to

her, closing his eyes hoping sleep will come to him swiftly.

That lasted about half an hour until he was wide awake again.

He was a morning person used to having to be up at the crack

of dawn either at the studio or in his study. Naturally he

assumed this was the reason. His body and mind were not

geared to be sleeping late in the mornings.

Finally, he researched and typed away on his laptop until it was

time to get ready for another day at the studio. He had not felt

that nagging feeling for the last few hours and felt highly

relieved. After he showered, shaved and groomed, he admired

his appearance in the full- length mirror.



41

The weirdness of the last few hours did not reflect. He was his

normal self again. He smiled at himself, ran his fingers through

his hair, pulled at the length of his sleeves and straightened up

once more. To his reflection, he said „You own the cameras,

they love you, and the people love you. You are the greatest

host ever. Make them love you, even more, today.‟ He winked

at himself and left for work.



Gertrude tapped on his studio room door and entered „Good

morning boss.‟ It was her usual greeting said by the way of

acknowledging that she had seen him and not out of any

concern or respect.

He replied likewise „Morning.‟

She put his file on the desk with the days‟ program and had

highlighted any changes from the previous days mock-up

program.

„Gertrude.‟ Jonathan called out to her as she was leaving the

room „You got a minute?‟

She hesitated unsure as to the sudden gentleness in his tone. A

tone of voice he had never used with her before.

„What‟s up?‟ Gertrude stopped and turned around. He was

looking at her enquiringly – wanting her to hear him out -this

was most unusual. It unnerved her.

„Do you ever have that feeling that you should be doing

something, or you should have done something, but you just

cannot remember where or what it is?‟

„Everyone has that.‟

„I know, but this is different. It‟s been for a few days now, and

it's almost becoming an obsession. This morning I felt it was

over, but once I was here, it started all over again.‟

„Probably just the stress and madness of this industry, I‟m sure

this kind of thing has happened to every person involved in TV

in one way or another. Take a pill.‟

„I have. Yes, you probably right. Thanks, Gertrude, well let‟s

get the day started then.‟ He rose from his chair and took his

jacket off the coat stand. Gertrude had exited the room in a

hurry before he decided to walk with her. The conversation

they had just had was odd and so out of character, any more of

that and she would call the doctor for them both.



42



The lights on the set were dark, Jonathan stood in the wings of

the stage as the audience cried for a change in status. One

single spotlight shone an oblong shape in the middle of the

floor; the audience yelled, the theme song chimed slowly

building up to a crescendo until the nerves of the audience

were at their tethers in exhilaration and then and only then

Jonathan walked into the spotlight. All else dissipated and he

shone.

He welcomed the world to his feet, introduced the guests and

tickled their interests with what was to be the gift the audience

would receive.

The nagging, uneasy feeling that plagued him had gone into the

backside of his subconscious and Jonathan presented himself to

the universe as the altogether, good looking, religious, perfect

family man. He believed this to be the truth.

A few hitches here and there but none detectable by anyone

other than the crew in the editing room. The end of the show

and the lights went down; the audience disappointed that it was

over mingled out of the studio while Jonathan swanked his way

back to his studio room. He felt on top of the world relishing

the comments from the people as he passed them. “Great

show.” “Fantastic show.” “Awesome performance.”

He sat smugly is his chair removing the makeup from his face

watching himself in the mirror. „Now that was a huge show.

Huge.‟ He spoke to his mirrored image.

He fought his way into the large luxurious seats of the limo

„Home please Mervin.‟

„Yes, sir. That was a brilliant show sir.‟

„Yes it was, wasn‟t it?‟ He switched off the intercom and

poured himself a glass of whiskey – neat. He sighed as the

flavour flowed down, enjoying the smoothness of the liquid

slide down his throat that felt scratchy the last few days. He put

his head against the backrest of the leather seat and shut his

eyes. He was calm, relaxed and strangely eager to be at home

with his wife and children.



„That was an amazing show babe.‟ Cassia said hugging her

husband in a welcome home embrace.



43

The children too gave him the hugs he had subconsciously

hungered to have. Instead of going to the kitchen for a glass of

wine as he did every other night he went with the children to

their lounge and watched their DVD with them. He asked

questions about the movie and the characters, teased them and

tickled them - a moment so rare in this household of Bale.

Cassia stood behind the couch watching in utter amusement as

the love of her life played so affectionately with their offspring.

It had been a long, long time since she could even remember

him sharing anytime, except when in public, with Willow and

Zayn.

Totally out of breath Jonathan escaped the clutches of the

children and left them to finish the rest of the movie.

He joined Cassia in their lounge and rested in his recliner

sipping his wine. Cassia sat on his lap, sliding her arms around

his neck and kissing him gently on the forehead „Now where

has this man been hiding in this body for so long?‟

Jonathan chuckled, placed his fingers on her hips exactly on

the spot he knew she was exceptionally ticklish and squeezed

„Hmm, I think he is here.‟

Cassia squealed laughing trying to wriggle out of his grip.

Their laughter and giggles attracted Willow and Zayn, which

were unable to resist the temptation not to join in. It was a free

for all - four bodies running around a plush penthouse

apartment, in designer clothes o n lavish flooring having a

natural way of life.

They collapsed on the floor in the middle of the lounge heaving

in exuberated cheerfulness. Jonathan pulled them all up into his

arms and held his family to his chest as a doting, loving father

would do on any given day.

Willow and Zayn went to bed sure of pleasant dreams filled

with laughter and the sunshine. Jonathan and Cassia shared an

evening of such intense intimacy which was only ever equaled

to when they were on their honeymoon.



As usual, Jonathan was awake in the wee hours of the morning

while his family slept soundly. He looked at the clock as got

his cup out of the cupboard for his usual cup of coffee and took

out a rusk to munch on – one o‟clock, much earlier than usual.



44

He yawned, waiting for the water in the kettle to boil, tapping

on the counter top hurrying it up.

With the cup in his hand and another rusk in the other he

turned to start his day in the study.

As he turned the shadow stood before him – It jolted Jonathan

into such a shock that he released his hold on the cup and sent

it crashing. His favourite and also the only cup he used was

shattered all over the kitchen floor.





45

11.



„How did you get in here?‟ He dashed for his phone on the

counter - the shadow was faster, and it too lay in pieces on the

floor.

„We cannot delay this any longer. I will tell you why I am here.

Why I have chosen you, this time, you will remember what I

have said, and you had better follow it verbatim.‟ He paused

allowing the words to sink in.

„Who are you?‟ Jonathan stuttered.

„Patience all will be revealed at the correct time. To the study!‟

A dark shadow resembling an arm pointed toward the study.

Jonathan obeyed trembling.

„Please don‟t touch my family. I have money anything, just

don‟t hurt them.‟

The shadow bellowed a large deep and forceful laugh. Jonathan

was sure his family would awake to the sound and be captured

by this shadow. He wanted to run, but he was frozen to the

ground he stood on.

„There is nothing in this world you can give me that I cannot

take for myself.‟ His presence was overwhelming, and

Jonathan began to feel woozy „Can I sit down.‟ He asked

already holding onto the chair.

The shadow remained silent, and he took his chance to sit

hoping it was not the wrong choice. He could not bear the

sound of that laughter again it made his brain and his inside

want to explode.

„You will conduct an interview with me.‟

„What?‟ Jonathan was perplexed. „An interview? All this just

for an interview?‟

„There are of course stipulations which if not adhered to – well

you can use your imagination on what I will do to you and

perhaps your family.‟

Jonathan stiffened.

„I‟ll meet you on set at three o‟clock. That gives you just over

an hour to make sure there is no one present in the stud io or

anywhere near it. That includes the usual crew in the control

rooms. It MUST be just you and me. All the cameras must be



46

pre-set to run automatically. I believe you know how to do

that.‟

Jonathan nodded.

„The interview will run from three o‟clock – not a minute later

– to six o‟clock and again not a minute later.‟

„What then?‟ Jonathan hesitantly asked just in case he

overstepped his mark.

„The editing staff, producer and directors, you know, the ones

in control, may enter at six fifteen. The show will go on air

throughout the world at eleven o‟clock. You need not worry as

to how the world will know about it. They just will!‟

Jonathan had no words, and when he focused his eyes again,

the shadow was gone. It took him a few seconds to gather

himself before he dashed to his room and changed into the first

suit his hands touched.

Within minutes, he was speeding in his sports car toward the

studio, this time without holding back on the power of the

engine.

He arrived on the set fishing the security staff out with a lame

excuse of needing privacy. They admired him so much it did

not cross their minds to question his requests.

He phoned Gertrude, Suzanne, Mr. Eckenberg, the director and

producer within minutes. They certainly did not appreciate the

early phone call but got the gist of importance and urgency and

agreed to be there on time.

He felt bare. It was the first time he sat in his chair without

makeup, without his hair brushed, without the spotlight.

He waited. It was two fifty- nine.

The nerves on his back stood up when the shadow seated

himself in the chair next to him.

„Everything set as I requested?‟

„Yes.‟

„Then we can begin.‟

Jonathan shuffled in his seat; this was such an uncommon

ground for him. He usually read from the teleprompter or

instructed via his ear piece. He cleared his throat then spoke.

„Ladies and gentleman, this is a different show today. I have

been requested to host this interview privately to which I have

obviously agreed to do. I hope you will enjoy the show.‟



47

He turned to the shadow that was now no longer a shadow but

a grave- looking man with hard features and black, the darkest

black imaginable, eyes. He sat in the chair like a human and yet

he looked to be afloat in the chair.

Jonathan shuddered with fright and lost his words as he stared

in horror.

„Continue Jonathan.‟ He instructed with a coarse gruff tone in

his voice.

He cleared his throat and simultaneously coughed a few times

very aware of the cold, clammy sweat that was piercing his

skin. „Who are you?‟ He finally asked still unable to shake the

quivering inside of him.

The man replied „I am Satan or as most like to call me the devil;

the accuser or fallen angel of God.‟

Jonathan gasped and sucked in a gulp of air almost choking

himself in the process.

Satan waited while Jonathan composed himself almost fully.

„What questions do I ask him? But can it really be him?‟

Jonathan‟s mind ran rampant as he fought to restrain the

thoughts and concentrate.

„Satan.‟ His voiced came out too high revealing his fear, he

coughed again and spoke again, trying with all his might to

keep his fears in control. „You say you are Satan. Can you

prove that you are?‟

„I could tell of all your indiscretions, that poor girl Linda but

that would not be fruitful, so let me do this.‟ He paused and

with it an evil, terrifying grin smeared across his face.

„I asked you to make sure that no one was to be here, is that

so?‟

„Yes and I did.‟

„No, you did not. Alex, do come on out from behind the wall in

the back of the studio. I know you‟re there. You see Alex is

one of my devoted followers, a Satanist at heart and

worshipper of note. You humiliated him and while you

believed he forgave you he has been plotting his revenge all

this time. He never left the building last night but hid in a

closet. Once he was alone, he began planting bombs around the

studio with the plan of setting them off as soon as the show

began today. Hence killing you, the staff, the audience and



48

himself, is that not right Alex.‟ He turned his head eerily to

where Alex had come out from behind the wall.

Alex took one look at Satan and started run for the exit.

Satan laughed that grotesque loud bellowing gaff and shot his

hand out toward Alex.

Alex caught alight and fell writhing in pain and anguish,

screaming until the flames overcame him and when he died he

turned to black ash. Nothing around the burning body of Alex

was affected, touched, melted or disturbed in any way. The

black ash slowly disappeared into nothing.

Jonathan cowered into his seat crying for mercy, mortified at

the sound of Alex‟s painful screams, terrified that he was next.

„I will not harm you - Yet!‟

Jonathan wiped his face of the tears swallowing down his sobs,

his heart hammering against his chest as the adrenaline flushed

through his body. He took another few minutes to compose and

recollect his thoughts and his nerves that were by now

shattered.

He continued in a croaky voice „If Alex was one of your

followers, why?‟ he paused to prevent the burst of sobs from

escaping „Why did you do that to him?‟

Satan cracked another horrendous laugh „Got your attention did

it not. Anyway, he was going to land up that way in the end, so

it made no difference.‟

„Why do you want this interview, I am very confused.‟

Satan exposed that evil grin of his and almost hypnotizing

Jonathan „That explanation will come later. First don‟t you

want to know how I came to be?‟

„Yes. Let‟s start with that. Will there be any more dramatics,

please I couldn‟t handle it.‟

„That depends on you, but for the moment there are no other

people in the building, and I have secured all the locks. So we

can continue.‟

„Thank you.‟ Jonathan moved his body position once more to a

more professional pose, thinking if he sat more correctly he

would feel more like the interviewer and not his guest‟s puppet.

„Please explain how you came to be who you are?‟





49

12.



Satan slithered into the seat, imitating man making himself

more comfortable. A smirk creased his hardened face while he

watched Jonathan watch him with great expectation.

„I will take you back to the beginning of time. God created all

things; this is true. He created the angels to serve Him. I was

one of them serving my Master in awe of His magnificence,

and I was His personal entertainer, it was my job.‟

God‟s glory shone so bright at times it was even difficult for us

angels to look at Him.

I‟m sure you can remember the story in the Bible of Moses and

how his skin shone after being in the presence of God - I‟ll get

to that later – but that is what it was like for me. After a long,

long era exposed to God‟s radiance, I thought that I had

absorbed some of it. And then after many more millions of

years, don‟t forget now this was not your years, God‟s time is

not the same as yours - I believed that I had the power of God.

In my egotistical mind, I had not realized that the shine I had

been minuscule compared to that of God‟s - a drop in the

ocean.‟

„I convinced a few other angles that we were equal to God in

power – now that took some doing – but I convince them I did

and we formed a rebellion against God.‟ Satan chuckled

wickedly to himself at the memory of the event. He shook his

head and with his long boney crooked fingers wiped his brow

and continued. „My comrade angels and I went to God and

demanded that His throne be turned over to us.‟ Satan let out a

grunted snort and shook his head again. „Was He angry? Let

me tell you this. This world and every inhabitant that has ever

existed on it have not known the wrath of God as we did at that

moment; God was so infuriated he created hell, Oh yes, hell is

real. Very real and the way the Word describes it in the Bible,

so it is; believe me, you don‟t want to go there.‟

„This is funny,‟ Satan smiles widely exposing his disgusting

teeth „my followers, Satanist, they honestly believe that I

control hell and that I will keep a cool place for them in hell.

What a joke.‟ Satan crashes out a roll of thunderous laughter

that brings tears to Jonathan‟s eyes it hurts so much.



50

„Watch this.‟ Satan motions with his hand and an oval portal

blended with the wildest colours of red and orange, with a

black hollowed centre forms between him and Jonathan. „Look

through that portal.‟

Jonathan hesitates naturally untrusting and afraid.

„Do it!‟ Satan hollers.

Jonathan immediately obeys and cautiously edges his face into

the portal that is floating in mid air.

Jonathan opens his eyes to what will probably haunt him for

the rest of his life. The flames are too intense for him to keep

his face in the portal for very long. His eyes feel as though they

have melted out of their sockets, his ears are burnt red. He is

only just able to see what Satan has shown him.

He has seen his place in hell. It‟s a place of fiery heat that will

consume him endlessly without easing without relief. Satan

shows him how demons devour him each day and then spit him

out to return and repeat the procedure over and over again. He

watches himself in hell screaming in pain so excruciating; the

gnashing of his teeth so audible it is unbearable.

He pulls his face from the portal in a panic and then throws up

on the floor next to his chair. His heart is racing toward

hysteria. He wants to run but instead flings himself into his

chair gripping onto it, cowering for mercy from Satan. Satan is

almost hysterical with his grotesque laughter.

Jonathan cannot speak he battles to control the mayhem

welling up within him.

„How do we prevent that?‟ Jonathan trembled.

„I will get to that at the appropriate time. Now where was I? Oh

yes – hell. God‟s fury ignited a spark of hell and banished us to

it. But God spared me unchained to the burning fires that

gouged out the pit of your soul eternally. I must re- iterate, hell

is a thousand more times worse than you have just seen.‟ Satan

shuddered at the mere thought of it.‟ I will be going back there

and this time, there will be no release for me, there is nothing I

can do about it, and I dread it like you will never understand.‟

He covered his face with his grotesque hands causing Jonathan

to almost vomit. He put his hands away, sighed and shook off

the image that was haunting him. „I think God spared me in the

hope that I would change and repent, and then he would



51

remove hell, but I was bitter and disappointed and yes I was

angry, so I made hell my kingdom. I felt powerful reigning

over those that were weak and powerless to do anything other

than cry in pain and anguish. I always hoped that the love God

had for me before I betrayed him was still valid, and he would

forgive me. He did love me and, of course, the other angels that

turned against him too but immensely hurt by my or our

actions. God turned His back on us, so to speak, and we were

left to dwell in those red flames.‟ He held his stomach, or

rather an area of where it was meant to be and almost cried.

„Oh those flames, those flames. They never stop. Never!‟ His

face distorted into a painfully stricken torment mixed with a

hateful surge. Jonathan slowly moved back into his chair, his

legs slightly trembling fearing another outburst or another view

into that portal of hell.

Satan‟s face slowly eased, and he looked at Jonathan realizing

he had frightened him. „Sorry, did not mean to frighten you

again, just yet anyhow, but you have to understand the

seriousness of hell for me to continue this interview.‟

„I do. I do.‟ Jonathan hastily said. Cold droplets hung on his

forehead in fear, but at the same time Satan‟s word “just yet

anyhow” spun through his mind, terrified enough as it was and

yet this was still not what the extent of his fear was going to be.

He shivered, motioned with his hand for Satan to carry on, not

that Satan required him to do so.

Satan readied his position to speak but thought about his next

words carefully, tapping his thighs with his hands hidden under

the long sleeves of his cloak. „So where were we? Oh yes!

There we were all in hell, and then God decided to create the

Universe and for whatever reason God pitied me and allowed

me to roam around His universe under the condition that I did

not derail any more of His angels. Naturally I agreed. This is

where all my fun and what I thought was to be my revenge

began.‟





52

13.



Jonathan took a drink of his water. His eyes were bright and

fearfully eager to hear what Satan was to say next, even if he

was still apprehensive he enthusiastically wanted to hear more

from Satan reveling in the fact that soon he might have all the

answers. A thought crossed his mind that once he had all of the

answers to every question he would be so powerful. He could

rule the world. A cynical grin pierced the corners of his mouth.

Satan looked at him sternly obviously knowing what he was

thinking. „Careful there with those thoughts of yours.‟

Jonathan shot him a wide-eyed glance, embarrassed to have

been so exposed. He quickly told himself to be careful in

future.

„You do that.‟ Satan commented, and Jonathan shook his head

shaking out any thoughts.

Satan laughed at Jonathan‟s discomfort. „God decided it was

time to create a masterpiece – Earth. Watching Him create it

was – well there are no words expressive enough to explain the

magnitude of His brilliance fully. But before Earth, when He

created light and made the planets move to establish day and

night, even the angels in hell sighed in awe.‟ Satan smiled to

himself and Jonathan could clearly see the awe across Satan‟s

face.

„Then He created Heaven, the sun, moon and stars. It was too

spectacular. And of course, it was time for Him to fill the Earth

with all creatures big and small and then, of course, the Garden

of Eden. It was pure beauty and spectacular. Ah if you could

only have seen that creation you would never have destroyed

this planet. It was something to behold. Pure splendor it was.‟

Jonathan sat fascinated in Satan‟s recollection of the creation

of time. He relaxed as he listened with so much admiration just

as Satan had.

„I presumed I would dwell amongst this creation for eternity

and in time God would forgive me completely, and I would be

re-joined with the other angels. Instead, God created man. His

greatest masterpiece! When God picked up the dust from the

earth, I presumed He was just creating another creature and

instead there became a man. Can you imagine watching that?



53

You could never conceive that concept. It was without a doubt

the most marvelous thing I had ever seen.‟

Satan had sighed before he continued. „God gave dominion

over all living creatures and things to Adam and put him in the

Garden of Eden. I watched in the background as Adam gave

names to everything, my jealousy increased with at every name.

And then God created Eve from Adam‟s rib, can you even

remotely identify with how that happened. I doubt it. While

Adam slept (okay it was a very deep sleep God put him in), he

took out his rib and from that rib created woman. Well, I heard

that day the angels sing like never before. That is when my

jealously compounded into revenge. It was not right for God to

give all this power and authority to a creation that had hardly

been with God for a few days. I was infuriated. The hatred

burned in me until it consumed me. I had to find a way to

destroy man and become God‟s favourite angel again.‟

Jonathan opened his mouth to say something, but Satan glared

at him clearly indicating he did not want to be disturbed.

„I overheard God instructing Adam and Eve not to eat from the

two Trees of Life and Knowledge of good and evil. Just by the

way, it was not an apple. Where man came up with that idea I

cannot remember, but it was a fabulous tree so stunning and

glorious, unlike all the others that I must tell you were

magnificent in their right. I immediately struck up a plan to get

them to disobey God.‟

Satan scratched his head thinking about the turn of events, and

it sounded like sandpaper against a rough wall. Jonathan

shuddered Satan laughed.

„I hounded Adam to take a bite of the fruit. He would not

budge, he was so obedient and so I turned my plan onto Eve.

She was much easier to convince, actually too easy. She ate of

the fruit and then gave it to Adam to eat. They were under the

impression just like the rest of us angels that if they ate the fruit,

they would die immediately. Guess that joke was on us hey!‟

Satan snickered; Jonathan just sat and stared at him blankly.

„When Adam saw that Eve did not die immediately he

convinced himself that I was telling the truth. He ate of the

fruit and then knowledge filled both Adam and Eve and the

look on their faces when they realized they were standing



54

naked in front of each other was hilarious. Boy did I laugh at

them.‟ Satan burst out laughing in his loud, boisterous

hallowing gruff cackle.

Jonathan closed his ears and his eyes.

Satan cleared his throat and resumed in his normal voice „I

made for the bushes while

Adam and Eve found leaves to cover themselves, and I heard

God wandering through the garden. I waited like a lion ready to

pounce on her prey for when God discovered what had gone

down. Of course, when Eve told Him I was the one who tricked

her God was furious. He was beyond furious and made me less

than all creatures; man and animals.

I remember he said “Because thou hast done this, thou art

cursed above all cattle, and

above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and

dust shalt thou eat all

the days of thy life: And I will put enmity between thee and

the woman, and between

thy seed and her seed; He shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt

bruise His heel.”

Satan remained silent for a few seconds, contemplating those

words.

In these words, I immediately formulated a plan to make God a

liar. For if the Great I AM would be unable to send Jesus “The

one who bruised his head” the God would be made out to be a

liar. And if God lies, all existence has to come to an end; earth,

hell, space, etc. would have to cease which would free me from

eternal death and torment.

„I did not see that coming; boy I was not happy. God removed

Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden, and the result was

that man would now eventually die of old age or disease. That

was when I formulated my plan to corrupt the world. I used my

sidekick angels to bring fornication, bestiality, witchcraft,

homosexuality, idolatry and all other immoral and sadistic uses

to remove mankind as far away from God‟s love as possible.

God was sorry he had created man, I was sure I was winning.‟





55

14.



Jonathan dared to challenge Satan that anyone could attest to

being Satan by merely quoting Genesis, but he very quickly

remembered Alex. No mortal man had the power or trickery to

do that. He decided against the challenge and preferred to let

Satan continue. He took another sip of water.

„Do you know the story of Noah?‟

„Of course!‟ Jonathan replied indignantly.

„The world was a mess, all thanks to me; evil dwelled in every

household except the household of Noah. I was king of the

world and mankind was my servant.‟ Satan raised his hideous

arms in a triumphant gesture.

„I used all of my wits to try and infiltrate Noah‟s family and to

make them turn from God. Nothing worked. He was such a

faithful servant.‟

„Sorry,‟ Jonathan interrupted „Don‟t mean to interrupt; I just

want to check the camera, stretch my legs a bit.‟ He said as he

stood up and looked at Satan and hoped he was not going to

zap him for being so bold.

„Do your thing.‟

Jonathan quickly stretched his legs as he took long strides to

the camera. He checked it over in a hurry and strode back to his

chair sitting in it all at the same time.

„You comfortable?‟ Satan asked sarcastically.

Jonathan neither nodded nor moved.

„Good. I knew God wanted to destroy the people of the earth

because they were so corrupt and evil; they were so rife with

filth, no matter what I did to get Noah to break his faith in God

he only grew stronger. You know God does have a sense of

humour.‟ Satan smirked.

„He told Noah to build this Ark. Good grief it was a huge boat

– by the by, do you know since the Ark, all the boats and ships

get built on this basis. When God told Noah to build this Ark I

was confused, I had never heard of such a thing, no-one or any

angel had ever heard of such a thing. We did not even know

what a boat was. It was a monstrous proportioned odd looking

house. He was mocked by every person every day. People



56

threw things at him as they mocked him. I was adamant that

Noah was going to cave and come over to my side.‟

Satan shook his head „I tell you that was the biggest thing that

had ever existed and besides the idea of it floating we had no

idea what is going to do. God told Noah that he was going to

bring rain down onto the earth and destroy everything in it.

Rain! What was rain? There had never been such a thing

before.‟ Satan sounded almost exasperated.

„Noah took hundred and twenty years to build that ugly

monstrosity. Would you be mocked for a hundred and twenty

years, day in and day out? I admired his tenacity. Do you know

the Ark was built by an amateur and the Titanic by

professionals?‟ Satan laughed at his joke terrifying Jonathan‟s

ears.

„Then one day this water dropped down from the sky. It was an

odd thing; no one understood what was happening. At first,

people laughed at this wonder, but when it started to fall in

torrents, people scurried for the shelter of their homes. But

therein lay a problem you see. Houses were not built to be

sheltered from rain since it had never rained before and it was

not long when the roofs of the houses began to cave in, and the

level of the water rose from the ground. People panicked and

ran about trying to salvage their possessions and to find shelter.

Noah by now had all the required animals and his fa mily in the

Ark just as God had instructed him. Who was laughing now

hey? Not me!‟

Satan shook his head in disgust. „Still no one ever believed the

water would rise as high as the boat was. But the rain kept

pouring down and down and down, I felt sorry for these people.

Every corner of the earth was wet and drenched. The level of

water rose and rose, people drowned by the second and

everyone tried to get into the Ark and begged, screamed or

cried out to Noah to save them. It was awful.‟ Satan hung his

head in shame.

„Then the ropes holding the Ark snapped and it began to sail.

Then and only then did I understand God‟s plan. It was a n

incredible sight, this huge ship sailing afloat that water, what

magnificence and ingenuity. I acknowledged defeat, and I was

highly annoyed. I knew, I believed, that if God had not done



57

that my second attempt to destroy God‟s throne would have

succeeded.‟

Jonathan coughed and cleared his throat. „So where is the Ark

now?

„God told Noah to hide it once they hit dry land and they were

all safely on the ground.‟

Jonathan sighed disappointedly. His sudden hopes of bringing

breaking news and the discovery of one of the most sought

after missing links vapourised.

Satan merely smirked at Jonathan.





58

15.



„Excuse me I need a quick bathroom break.‟ Jonathan

requested.

Satan nodded. Jonathan did not wait for a second confirmation

and shot out of his chair cantering out of the studio and down

the corridor to men‟s toilets.

He just made it, and while relieving himself, he wondered if he

dared to phone anyone to let them in on what was happening.

An image of Alex and the portal of hell flashed to the forefront

of his mind, and very quickly he thought he‟d rather not.

Hurrying back to the studio set and settling in his chair he

looked at Satan‟s amused expression „What?‟

„Oh nothing, I have always been fascinated at the complex and

perfectly designed human body and especially the need to get

rid of the excess.‟

„Well be glad you never have to be bothered with it. I can be a

nuisance most of the time.‟

They enjoyed a chuckle together immediately easing

Jonathan‟s tense shoulders.

„Let‟s see, the next man so faithful to God I had tried to destroy

was, oh yes Abraham.‟ A low growl dissipated from Satan‟s

throat. Immediately the relaxed tension erased Satan snarled as

he reminisced „I resented Abraham the most of all God‟s Holy

men. It is through Abraham that God made His covenant. Do

you remember learning about Abraham? Through Abraham, all

people would be blessed?‟

Jonathan thought a little then nodded slightly.

„His children will be like the sun and the stars. The lineage of

Jesus comes from Abraham, so many generations for a King.‟

Satan sighed.

„When I heard God tell this to Abraham, I had to destroy him. I

couldn‟t let God‟s plan succeed and produce a pure bloodline

until His Son came to earth. I had to infiltrate His plans and

destroy all of God‟s believers.‟ He paused to make sure he had

Jonathan‟s attention.

„So I paid a little visit to Abraham and Sarah. They were so old

already; I used their age as my weapon. I quietly whispered in

their ears that they must surely realize they are too old to have



59

children. Where would generations be born from them when

they are already so old? And I also convinced them that surely

if God wanted them to have children, he would‟ve done so by

now, how was it possible for a barren woman to have a child. I

wasn‟t so hard to win them over with that argument. Then I

persuaded Sarah to let her husband, Abraham, sleep with the

Egyptian slave girl Hagar. I put all the words in her mouth and

softened Abraham‟s heart to her plea. They fell like rocks for

it.‟ Shakes he head.

„So Hagar has this baby Ishmael. Clearly God cannot break a

promise you see; He does not lie, and so all my plans were for

naught. All I got out of it was the lineage of the Muslim people

through Ishmael.‟

Jonathan sits and raises his hand like a schoolboy in class „So

this is where they their religion from?‟

„Yes. Now on with the story! God fulfills his promise to

Abraham and Sarah and blesses them with a baby. At her age,

ninety years old, she has a baby! I never thought it would

happen, in any case, so Isaac is born. What a man he was.‟

„What did you do to him?‟

„Oh I tried plenty, but I‟m not going to dwell on him. I‟d rather

speak about his son Jacob‟s one son - Joseph. O h man, what a

great man he was. I admired very highly.‟

„You admired him? You did not hate him?‟

„Yes I hated him, with a passion at that, but I had to admire

him too, he was that great a man.‟





60

16.



„Now Jacob loved his youngest son Joseph; I suppose that was

a natural thing since he was the son of his wife. In those days if

the wife could not conceive the wife would allow the husband

to sleep with the maid so he could have heirs.‟ Satan just

remained silent thinking for a few seconds before he went on

„Now Joseph was obedient and gentle and very much unlike his

brothers. So for me, it was easy to convince the brothers to do

all kinds of awful things to Joseph. But Joseph just sucked it all

up and forgave them every time.‟

„Why didn‟t you give up on him then and turn on someone

else?‟

Satan shot a glare at Jonathan „Because Joseph was to play an

important part in God‟s plan, not the others. The others were

already in my trap so what would have been the point? Focus

man!‟

Jonathan shivered.

„When Joseph became of age I made the brothers sell Joseph

into slavery. Joseph was in thrown into a pit.‟ Satan cackled

with utter evil.

„That pit was vile. It was like a grave. Just think of being

buried alive, well that pit was about the same. Bugs, insects

and all things creepy crawling around endlessly. Joseph could

scream for help but who would hear him, and he didn‟t even

bother to do that. He just waited! He knew God was going to

rescue him.‟

Jonathan rubbed his arms feeling the creepy crawlies rushing

over him.

„What I did not know was this was all God‟s plan to have

Joseph captured and put into slavery. I was so blazing mad

when I discovered that.‟ Satan slammed his hand down on the

chair which made Jonathan leap in fright.

„Joseph then gets sent to Egypt and works as a slave to

Potiphar the pharaoh. I had fun and games there; those

Egyptians were so gullible and easy. The best fun was with

Potiphar‟s wife. Watching her trying to coax Joseph into her

bed was hilarious. She would‟ve made a fantastic high-class

hooker in today‟s world, she was brilliant, and I know for a fact



61

that no man could resist her; except Joseph of course.‟ Satan

growled.

Then he sighed a defeated sigh „After many years of Joseph

being the “perfect man”‟ Satan indicted the inverted commas in

the air while being very sarcastic „Joseph became ruler over all

of Egypt, only answerable to Pharaoh and what does the man

go and do? He brings all of his family to him to live with him.

He forgives them for all they did wrong to him – wow, that was

a bitter pill to swallow – and Jacob (Israel) and the twelve

descendants flourished for over four hundred years, and there

was nothing I could do to wreck that no matter how hard I tried.

But I‟d abide my time once more.‟

„There had to be eventually a new Pharaoh and did I like this

one. He was my servant; this was my chance to destroy the

world of God‟s servants. He hated the Israelites just as I did.

He made them slaves again to the Egyptians. He made them do

incredibly tough physical work like building the pyramids. Do

you have any, any idea how heavy those huge stones were that

they had to carry to build those things? I tell you, you could

never imagine something like that era or what it was like to be

an Israelite. I reigned supreme in those days; I thought I had

finally ridden the earth of God‟s dominance.‟ Satan‟s ugly

fingers rubbed his forehead.

„Yeah right! God had a plan. He was setting me up for a lark

alright. The pharaoh was getting so mad, as was I that these

Israelites were not dying off as a nation but, in fact, growing

stronger. So I encourage his thoughts to have all the sons born

killed by the midwives. But of course, I should‟ve thought it

through better and had the Egyptian woman be the midwives,

they would‟ve obeyed. The Israelite midwives feared God

more than they feared the Pharaoh, so they simply disobeyed

him. He was not happy. I planted the scheme for the Egyptian

woman to drown the newborn sons. ‟ Satan laughed. „That was

fun to watch.‟

Jonathan cringed into his chair. The notion of throwing up was

not far off.

„But of course, God was one step ahead of me and what

happened – Moses gets born, his mother hides him in the

bulrushes and of all the women to find him, it had to be the



62

kind and gentle daughter of Pharaoh. I couldn‟t catch a break to

destroy Gods' plan for mankind completely.‟

„Now when Moses grew up, he was a strong boy but also with

a kind heart. He had a major flaw, though; he stuttered, and I

thought well there was no ways God was planning on using

this man to rescue his precious Israelites. I mean come on! A

leader that stuttered, it was absurd. But you see God knew I

would think this and I, of course, was not paying enough

attention. I was too busy wrecking havoc anywhere I was able

to.‟

Jonathan reached for his glass of water and realized it was

empty poured more into it. Satan watched him impatiently.

„So I presume you know the story of Moses?‟ Jonathan nodded

finishing his gulp of water.

„Yes, Moses the stutterer. He frees the Israelites from slavery

after four hundred years. Those plagues that sent to Pharaoh

were phenomenal, spectacular and fearsome. You‟ve seen

movies depicting these plagues have you not?‟

„Yes, a few.‟

„Well let me tell you, with all the cinematography you have in

the world, with the greatest technology possibly you will never

grasp the magnitude and ferociousness of them. And the sea

that parted, now that was nothing short of absolute brilliance. It

is in fact too great to describe, the height and strength of those

walls of water that held up to allow over four million people;

men, woman and children, plus all their belongings that

included all their cattle and chickens and whatnot. I was in awe

of such power but at the same time, it infuriated me so much I

told Pharaoh to send his armies to the Israelites and to bring

them back to Egypt. A lot that did hey! So the Israelites

wandered through the wilderness on their way to the Promise

Land of Canaan.‟

Satan had taken a breath of imaginary air before he continued

„You know people are so fickle. They so easily forget the

miracle that God did for them and the favour He brought them.

Never mind the love He had for them. I was rampant stirring

up all kinds of discord amongst them. They complained. Of my

word did they complain and moan. It was superb. It was

brilliant to sit back and watch how easily bitter they became.



63

And every time God appeased them they came round – until

the next time. Moses, the poor man, made one little mistake –

the only time I managed to get to him – and he hit the rock in

anger. It was entertaining! God did not think so. God showed

Moses all the land, but he died on the mountain and wasn‟t

allowed to enter the Promised Land. God made that generation

wonder around the wilderness for forty years. I had pleasurable

time there. But what I did not realize was that God was

depleting that disobedient generation and that the new

generation that was obedient to God‟s commands would enter

Canaan. Silly me right! So Aaron and Caleb take a whole

nation into Canaan, and the fields are ready for harvesting, and

it is glorious in its entire splendor. Oh yes, they flourished

there for many years.‟





64

17.



Satan is about to speak again when Jonathan raises his hand. „I

need another bathroom break, please.‟

„Another one? Go quickly.‟ Frustration fills Satan‟s face as

Jonathan bolts for the bathroom.

He is back in seconds „Can I continue?‟ Sarcasm slid off

Satan‟s tongue. „Naturally over time, there are more cities

established and of course with great thanks to me -anarchy.

The people forged war upon one another and every time God‟s

people were victorious. God‟s people rose above all, and there

were some fierce wars. I thoroughly enjoyed them. Over time, I

made the people want a real king. I implanted in their minds

that a king will help them to rule, and they would have stability

and all that nonsense. Boy, they were so stupid! So they got

their king. The first king was Saul; he was weak and had no

backbone, so it was easy to corrupt him. Then came his son- in-

law David. What a great man, he was revered b y everyone,

especially after the Goliath episode. Honestly, there was not a

single person who believed he would slay Goliath but God

knew, and he made a fool out of me. I had to get Him back for

that if nothing else. When David stated that he wanted to build

a temple to honour God, I had to do something, to weaken him.

I was quickly diminishing any stronghold I had in the world.

Then I created the greatest love story of all time by default. I

enticed Bathsheba to wash on the roof of her dwelling. She was

beautiful to behold. Truly beautiful and carefully I whispered

in David‟s ears to lust for her. It worked. Of course, you know

what transpired after that. I even convinced David to have

Bathsheba‟s husband killed.‟ Satan let out a raucous laugh. „I

felt for sure it was the end of him and God‟s favour toward him.

Ha! David, as correctly stated in the Bible, was a man after

God‟s own heart. God loved him. David repented oh shame the

poor man did he repent. He would never build the temple to

God as God promised that the sword would never leave

David‟s kingdom due to the blood that stuck to it. Once again I

was convinced that it was all said and done. David would

surely never regain any power or authority again. God‟s

punishment was that the child they bore out of deceit died, and



65

I gave myself a high five as you say these days. I was so proud

of myself. Sadly that was shortly lived as God forgave David

and accepted his repentance and gave them another son. This

one was the greatest king of all, besides God of course.

Solomon was born and when the time was right all he

requested from God was wisdom. I mean, come on, wisdom!

He could‟ve asked for wealth and power just as I tried to

convince him to do, but he still went for wisdom. Naturally

God was very chuffed with him and gave it to him. You think

you are clever or that you have clever people in this world

today. Think again. That Solomon was exceptionally wise. You

get clever people, and then you get wise people that always

know the right decision to make; well he was wiser than them.

I tried in vain to create a war amongst Solomon‟s kingdom, but

God toyed with me. He kept all the other countries busy

fighting each other that Solomon‟s kingdom reigned in peace

and tranquility for forty years, and Solomon built the temple

during this period; well it was indescribable in its splendour.

There has never existed its equal. I had to destroy this status

quo. I then went to the leaders and whispered in their ears that

the country should divide into a North and South. They agreed

easily, and it was so. God allowed the North to keep fighting

on and off, but He kept the South at peace, this He did so that

God‟s plan; the one and only Saviour would come from the

house of David. It made me crazy. I had to wait for many,

many years to finally get the South at war. The South

eventually moved away from God through Solomon‟s sons,

sons.‟

„There was this one time I almost gave up my vengeful fight

against God, and that was when God paused time so that

Joshua was able to defeat the Amorites. He made the sun stand

still over Gibeon, and the Moon stand still over Ajalon. A

miraculous wonder I will never forget and be amazed by.‟

„The South was eventually destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. I

man after my own heart I tell you.‟ Satan laughed at his irony.

„Nebuchadnezzar destroyed that temple. What a fantastic sight

to see those walls crumble.‟ Satan gloated.

„The battle won but not my war against God. His people once

again became slaves and removed from the country. A prophet



66

Jeremiah prophesied that God‟s people would be free after

seventy years of captivity, exactly seventy years it was so.

Cyrus, the Greek king, gave them everything they needed to

rebuild the temple that of course they did. However, it never

regained that same glory.





67

18.



Jonathan shuffled in his seat, sitting for so long had made his

bum a little numb and during the movement, he happen to look

at the large studio clock. Time had pressed on speedily, six

o‟clock was rapidly approaching. Satan too looked at the clock

and grunted.

„There was so much more I wanted to tell you but now I will

have to push on. So let me get to the interesting part.

Throughout the years, I kept on with my war against all that

were good and righteous, many times I was so close to

destroying everything when God whipped it out from under me

again. But God grew weary of His people that continually

disobeyed Him all because of me, and He knew it was time to

bring the change that would save all of mankind. The old laws

were not sufficient and to save them.‟

Jonathan sat up with interest quickly gulping down more water.

„Jesus was born. For thirty-three years, he roamed around just

like any other boy and man, but he was blameless and a really

good man.‟ Satan paused in thought for a few seconds.

„At the time of the Passover feast Jesus began teaching in the

synagogues and temples, the people were astounded at His

wisdom. He was just a boy then, but I had to make sure

everyone knew that he was simply a carpenter‟s son and not

the Messiah they were all promised.

When the time was right for Jesus‟ ministry to begin He went

to the wilderness for forty days. Surely I could tempt Him there

while He was hungry and alone. Not Jesus - No! He sent me

packing. A lot of Jews believed me. However, as you know,

Jesus found His disciples, and they spread the word throughout

the world that He had come to save them. Now remember they

did not have the Bible then, and it was difficult to get people to

believe Him until he started with all those miracles. Jeepers

how do you not believe when you see a blind man see for the

first time in his life or a man‟s disease leave him or – and the

best – make a dead man alive again. Those were powerful

things Jesus performed, and it was incredulous to behold. I was

madly jealous, but I was able to keep still some people

disbelieving. I was lucky enough to take hold of the Pharisees,



68

Sadducees and the likes of them and when I got Jesus arrested

and they way the treated Him by flogging Him and beating

Him till His flesh tore I was well pleased with myself. With

regards to the flogging, do you know they only flogged Him

thirty-nine times and not forty. In doing so, they kept the law

rather than honouring the Messiah, who was in their presence,

thirty-nine times was supposedly a merciful flogging cause the

Romans said that if you flogged a man forty times, he would

die, but Jesus had to get crucified. I tell you I got so much

pleasure watching Him being beaten up. I had the mob so

energized it was just too easy. Can you believe they let that

Barabbas man, a barbaric murderer, go free?‟ Satan burst out in

a loud laugh causing Jonathan to close his ears for fear they

would burst.

„Then Jesus with His beautiful crown of thorns on His head

was made to carry His cross all the way to Golgotha, but they

had to get that other fellow Simon to help. When Jesus hung on

the cross, I relished every second. You must realize, I was

trying to force Jesus to use the ten thousand angels at His

disposal to destroy the world. In doing so I‟d make God out to

be a liar, and that would cause all creation; Hell and Earth to

cease to exist and then I‟d get spared the pain and misery.

I watched as the air deflated from His lungs and He had to

struggle to breathe. How the pain of trying to hold Himself up

was too unbearable and the blood poured from His wounds was

like sweet nectar to my thoughts. I thought I had won and had

finally defeated God. Jesus could have called twelve legions to

take Him off that cross and destroy the world, but He hung

there between two criminals. I stood by with my fingers

crossed waiting for my chance to rule the universe because

God would be the liar as He would not have fulfilled His

promise and the universe would disintegrate and become null

and void, and I would rather have had that than to spend

eternity in Hell. But I failed once more, at the ultimate defeat

of God. God fulfilled every promise and raised Jesus, and He

reigns with Him in Heaven, interceding for all of those who

truly believe in Him.‟

Jonathan sat glued to his seat; his eyes were wide as saucers.



69

„I was not going to stop there, as long as I had time to walk

among the living on earth I could still dethrone God. I believed

it. I started my new plan because God was so specific about

eternal salvation and how to obtain it that I used that.‟

Jonathan quickly interrupted him „Which is?‟

„Confess, repent, and be baptized. Let me explain; Confess

Jesus as the Saviour and the Son of God, repent of your sins

and be Baptized into Jesus and be reborn a new person free

from sin. You see Jesus died for your sins, He was the

sacrifice. In the Old Testament law, they had to sacrifice every

year, and it was a lamb, but how can a lamb wash away sins, so

Jesus became the Lamb to die for your sins. Then when you

come out of the water of baptism, you are too resurrected into a

new life with Jesus just as the resurrection of Jesus out of the

grave. Simple hey! I had to react to this hastily, so I told the

guards at Jesus‟ grave to tell the Jews He had not risen. At least,

I managed to rob hundreds of people the true knowledge that

Jesus had risen and that He is the Messiah. Now I had to dilute

the command of baptism. I let them believe the sprinkling of

water on a baby‟s head was sufficient, in fact, sprinkle does

separate you from Jesus and the death, burial and the

resurrection. How can a six- month-old baby repent?‟ Satan let

out a raucous laugh.

„I put in the minds of people and in today‟s world - it is not that

difficult - that if they touched the TV, they would be saved, or

you just had to pray or say you believed, and you would have

eternal life. I made the two most profitable businesses mine;

the first was drug dealers and the second was the preac hers of

my church. You see many people and perhaps even the

preachers themselves believe they are in God‟s church but, in

fact, they are in mine. I have caused all these things to draw

people away from serving God; like – greediness over money

amongst those in the leadership of the Church, abuse of God‟s

name, woman are meant to be silent in God‟s worship service,

and now you have them even preaching. The use of musical

instruments during worship service; oh my, the young are so

influential it was so easy to change a church service into a rock

concert, and they all think it is called worshipping – it‟s

hilarious.‟ Satan giggled as far as he could giggle.



70

„I created havoc in the world too so as to keep people from

believing the word of God. I set it into the minds of humans

that the constitutions were more important than the word of

God. Brutal punishments for Christians in certain parts of the

world, I lured people away from thinking that baptism is the

only way to Heaven, you will believe this lie because yo u did

not heed the Word, which is the Bible – and it is the only way

by the way. I split congregations and caused mankind to create

all these different denominations, and the best of all was to

play around with the matter of human rights and same sex

marriages. I mean that is an abomination to God, and yet you

all fell for it because I whispered into a few influential people's

ears that it is acceptable. And don‟t forget those influential

people had a whack load of money to buy their way into the

leaders of the world. There were just too few good people that

did nothing for a lot of bad people. Now there is nothing wrong

with being wealthy, but the wealthy are supposed to support

the poor but I let them think they should rather want more

wealth, and now they revel in their wealth only wanting more

and more, and the poor remain destitute.‟ Satan paused a

second for recollection.

„I loved placing it into people‟s minds that the Bible is not the

word of God but in fact just a book somebody wrote.‟

„Is it?‟ Jonathan, realizing that he would require baptism

interrupted Satan.

„Oh, it is truly the word of God, and should be revered without

a doubt.‟ Satan smiled.

„But I tempt, ensnare, devour, take captive, hinder, I am the

father of liars, I oppress, and I fill man‟ heart with hatred.‟

Satan sat in silent contemplation for a few moments. His face

changed into anger when he remembered the next tidbit he

wanted to share.

„I was enraged when they changed the paganistic festival to

25th December, Christmas day. My festival! My festival! My!‟

Satan slammed his fist down on the arm of the chair breaking it

into splinters. He watched in amusement as Jonathan‟s arm

flew up to cover and protects his face.





71

19.



„So now you know all about me and what I have done to the

world.‟

With his lips quivering and his throat congested he squeaks out

„Why have you revealed all of this? Why give away all your

secrets?‟

Satan‟s face becomes extremely downcast and mournful „Just

wait….‟ Satan sighs sadly. „I am defeated, and all I can do is

reveal the truth for once in my existence and maybe, now

people will listen to me since they don‟t want to listen to God,

their creator.‟

Jonathan‟s body wants to run from the chair and find a church

to get baptized, but he cannot move for fear that Sata n will zap

him as he did with Alex.

„You can only leave the studio once the show begins to air.

You have to wait until after the editing the interview. I don‟t

see why you should have an advantage over anyone else do

you?‟

Jonathan just shook his head, everything inside of him was

screaming for him to make a run for it, but fear kept him seated.

There was a rattle at the door and then a knock. Both Satan and

Jonathan turned to look at the door. Jonathan looked at Satan

for an answer as to what he was supposed to do.

„Go and let them in.‟

When Jonathan opened the door there stood all the editing staff,

the producer and Mr. Eckenberg waiting to enter with very

curious faces. When they laid their eyes upon Jonathan, they

were instantly shocked at his appearance. He was sweating

profusely, and his eyes were bloodshot from his tears as well as

the heat from the portal to hell.

„Jonathan. What‟s wrong?‟ Mr. Eckenberg asked as they all

moved forward toward the control room.

Jonathan merely shook his head „Oh it‟s been a long morning

without any sleep.‟ He did not want to hurry them on as it

would be suspicious and the last thing he felt like doing right

now was answering questions he was not allowed to answer.

Satan had disappeared from his chair when Jonathan returned

to the set. The staff filled their mugs with coffee and settling



72

into their usual pace before actually getting started with the

editing. Jonathan was about to explode out of his skin he was

so impatient and on edge.

Mr. Eckenberg requested that Jonathan joins them in the

control room, but Jonathan declined. He was too nervous to

stand in that confined space and besides that was one interview

he never wanted to relive again – ever.

The staff get going and as they work their easy disposition

changes into a tensed concern. Jonathan hovers around the exit

doors ready to make a run for it as soon as it is over.

During this time, adverts are going around the world. The

headlines on each and every TV, on every network and every

channel shout “Exclusive special interview with the devil on

The Bale Show.”

As the interview rolls along Jonathan can hardly bear it no

more, he sits on the floor and sobs. His body shakes violently

as the dread of knowing takes over his senses.

In the control room, the staff is glued to the TV screens, their

teeth begin to rattle, and the sweat pours off their brows as the

truth gets unveiled to them. Mr. Eckenberg cannot stand it any

longer, and he dashes out of the control room terrified and

screaming.

He reaches Jonathan still crying on the floor and as Jonathan

looks up at him and their eyes connect reflecting the same fear.

Satan zaps Mr. Eckenberg.

He shouts out in horror and in severe pain then fizzles into a

red burning dust before Jonathan‟s eyes. Satan calls from

somewhere in the walls „No one is to leave until it‟s over.‟

Jonathan screeches in agony and absolute terror writhing in

fear and despair on the floor.

At eleven o‟clock exactly the show without the aid of anyone

in the control room begins to air on the TV all over the world.

The staff mesmerized to the seats, too afraid to move or budge.

Their tears flow uncontrollably.





73

20.



As the interview continues the TV people all around the world,

stop what they are doing to watch. After all, this is Jonathan

Bale, and if he is hosting a special broadcast, it must be

something spectacular and not too be missed.

As the interview progresses worldwide panic slowly ensues as

people realize how wrong they have been and that there is, in

fact, a God, and He has given a definite command for entry

into Heaven, written in His Word the Bible.

Jonathan crumbled at the exit door begging Satan to let him go.

He hears a click and stops sobbing enough to hear Satan say to

him „Go!‟ Satan throws out his outrageous laughter and

vanishes from sight and sound.

Jonathan scrambles to his feet; they are like jelly, and he

struggles to walk let alone run. He leans against the walls of

the building to get to his car. It is a struggle for him to press

even the button of the electronic remote to open his car door.

As he tries to get the key into the ignition he yells at himself to

calm down; he is too out of control to even obey himself. By

sheer luck, he gets the key in and starts the car. His legs are

shaking so shoddily changing gears is almost impossible. He

has no co-ordination and in desperation, he pulls out of his

parking lot in whatever gear he found first. He crashes his car

into the cars alongside him but cares not and speeds out of the

parking garage.

He races down the road shouting „Get out the way! Help me!

Where is a Church! Oh please help me, God!‟

His phone vibrates in his pocket, and the call appears on the

radio. It is Cassia.

„Babe where are you, we are watching this interview, we are so

scared; please come home. Please, babe, come home.‟ Cassia

sobs as she begs her husband to go home to her and their

children.

„Save yourself.‟ Jonathan cries back to the radio still racing

down the road.

As he flings the car around one corner after another desperately

looking for a church that is open, he is aware that there are now

hoards of people running about the streets yelling and



74

screaming. They have clearly been watching the show and have

realized their fate. Jonathan sees a small church down a side

alley and pulls up on the sidewalk. He jumps o ut the car

forgetting to lock or even close the door. He runs up to the

entrance and sees a crowd of people begging a man to baptize

them. He refuses. They beg even louder. His car is gone. Stolen,

he screams at the sky and runs colliding with others with the

same purpose.

As Jonathan runs past businesses and stores he has to dodge

others streaming out of the entrance doors; they too are looking

to find God. Every church he passes has people banging on the

doors, smashing windows to get in, kneeling in front of the

church praying. Churches are preaching half- truths and whole

lies!

Pandemonium had set in all over the world. Chaos was extreme

and panic, terror and fear were rampant.

Jonathan was exhausted and running out of sheer adrenalin,

crying and begging anyone to help him.

He bashes into a church, pushes his way through the crowd to

the front not caring if he hurt anyone in the process or the

verbal abuse flung at him. He sees they are sprinkling water on

the people in a hurry to get them all done. „That‟s wrong.‟ He

yells

„It‟s all we can do in the mayhem.‟ Replied the man in

desperation.

„It‟s wrong. It‟s wrong. Didn‟t you hear what Satan said?‟

Jonathan shouted as he turned and bolted out of the church.

Every church he went too was overcrowded with people on the

same mission. He found a church baptizing people fast and

furiously; it was the Church of Christ, but the line of people

was so long. He ran on looking for another church of the same

name.

He stopped to take a breath and looked across the road toward

a shop that had TVs in the window playing the last few minutes

of the interview. Jonathan looked at Satan and crumbled to the

ground. The reminder was too much for him to bear. An urge

of energy overcame him, and he managed to get up and

continue his search amongst the thousands of others for the

same reprieve.



75

He came to several churches with Church of Christ bolded

written on them, and each one had hundreds of people waiting

to get baptized. Jonathan again forced his way to the front

receiving the same violent reaction from the people each time.

At one church, he stood in front of the minister and pleaded. “I

am Jonathan Bale I know you recognize me. I did that

interview. I should get baptized first. I should get priority

treatment. Baptize me now then you can carry on with the

others.‟

The people shouted the objections at his demands. For the first

time, Jonathan Bale was unable to use his name or fame to get

what he wanted. For the first time since “The Bale Show”

started he was treated like the enemy. No one cared who he

was anymore. He was now just like any other human being.

„I‟m afraid you will have to get into the line like everyone else.

We are all equal in the eyes of God, and you are no exception.‟

„But I…‟ He started to raise his objections when the line of

people quickly became a mob and physically forced him out

the church. Jonathan cursed and objected in vain.

He was panicking that he was unable to use his fame for self-

gain and continued to search for someone to baptize him.

He staggered in and out of so many churches, the ones open

were inundated with scrambling panicking people waiting in a

line as long as a mile.

He ran past a park noticing a woman sitting peacefully on the

ground smiling. He looked at her intently confused as to why

she acted so differently to everyone else. Wanting to go and

speak to her curious as to why she acted so differently he

slowed his pace and made his way to her. As he turned a mob

of hysterical people knocked him over in their pursuit to find

salvation. Jonathan stood up cursing them in loud, obscene

profanity. Still in the process of yelling; another group of

anxious people came pouring past him, dragging him with

them. There was no way to turn around or change direction as

groups of people became masses. The wailing, crying,

screaming, reached such intensity it was impossible to hear

their thoughts.

Jonathan ran around aimlessly reduced to the stature of a

normal person begging for mercy.



76

He thought of his family and cried. But his selfish, arrogant

nature had now left him alone amongst strangers while his

beautiful wife held her children in her bosom.

Cassia sobbed uncontrollably.



The woman sitting on the grass in the park somehow void of

being run over by the mobs of people sat peacefully with her

eyes closed looking up to Heaven. She prayed continually

smiling. Her face was a light of joy.





77

21.



Worldwide hysteria reigned in every country, some

unfortunately during the darkness of night, others through

snow, rain, hail, dust storms, heat, hurricanes but all were

subjected to the same event.

Jonathan floundered through streets, alleys and parks searching

along with the rest of the world for someone who cared enough

to baptize him.



For a second there was a deathly silence, a quiet before the

storm as if the world required a pause for something great that

was about to happen - it was!



The sun darkened not to black but to an unusual shade never

seen before by mankind. There were loud sounds haunting the

people of the world from the skies. At first, the consensus was

that it was thunder, but it soon became too loud even for that.

Their ears could bear it no longer, and people fell like flies to

the ground covering their ears for mercy.

When the sound lessened, a heavy white, very white, too bright

to look at, cloud formed low down and hovered above the earth.

The dense intensity of the cloud pushed everyone downward,

and people shuddered on the ground crying and pleading for

mercy. Some, among them, was Linda, sat on the ground and

smiled in awe and wonder and excitement.



And suddenly there were ear deafening loud trumpet sounds in

the heavens. All the people of earth looked up.

It is the second coming of Christ.

Many, many, people do not have a chance at repentance for

they had rather listened to Satan for a few hours and believed

him than listen to God for more than two thousand years.



Soon what seemed to be an apparition appeared through the

cloud, brighter than the cloud itself, that the people turned their

faces to the ground fearing permanent blindness. A loud voice

resounded and instantly many smaller spirits - angels, not so

white came floating to earth.



78



If ever Jonathan had been afraid of what he had seen and heard

in the past few hours, nothing was compared to what he saw

right then. Graves opened, and souls of people lifted skyward.

Jonathan and people around him screamed for mercy that God

would be merciful to them as the souls of many floated past

them. For the longest time, this went on and suddenly living

people began to rise and float towards God. The angels

instructed by God floated about lifting those selected and

chosen to live for eternity with Him. As they elevated to the

sky, they were transformed into God‟s likeness.



Those rejected on the earth stretched out their arms in hysteria

beseeching forgiveness.



Jonathan; already been privy to his eternal life, as the images of

the portal to hell flung to the forefront of his mind, was unable

to do anything but cry in shame and sorrow. He looked

momentarily at Linda, still smiling, and watched how she was

lifted up and became an image of God.



What seemed to be an eternity of watching the faithful servants

of God be raised and welcomed into His arms ended.



Another silence hung heavily for a few seconds before Satan

stood before Jonathan. Satan laughed, and Jonathan cried.



“Not everyone who says to me, „Lord, Lord,‟ will enter the

kingdom of heaven, but the one who does the will of my Father,

who is in heaven.

On that day, many will say to me, „Lord, Lord, did we not

prophesy in your name, and cast out demons in your name, and

do mighty works in your name?

And then I will declare to them, „I never knew you; depart

from me, you workers of lawlessness.”



Matthew 7: 21 - 23



The end



79

More books by the author

Aileen Friedman





Changes From a Sunset

ISBN 978-0-620-52564-0

Published 2012





When is My Forever

ISBN 978-0-620-55793-1

Published 2013



Second is Best

ISBN 978-0-620-59758-6

Published 2014





The Sparkle in Her Eyes plus Six more Short

Stories

ISBN 978-0-620-64434-1

Published 2015





Available on



Amazon

http://www.amazon.com/-/e/B0073SRDX4





Smashwords

https://www.smashwords.com/profile/view/aileenfriedman





80





Document Outline


Aileen





